---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Basic Rules and Legal / Prestige Classes
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# PRESTIGE CLASSES

Prestige classes offer a new form of multiclassing. Unlike the basic
classes, characters must meet Requirements before they can take their
first level of a prestige class. The rules for level advancement apply
to this system, meaning the first step of advancement is always choosing
a class. If a character does not meet the Requirements for a prestige
class before that first step, that character cannot take the first level
of that prestige class. Taking a prestige class does not incur the
experience point penalties normally associated with multiclassing.

## Table of Contents

-   [Definitions of Terms](#definitions-of-terms)
-   [Arcane Archer](#arcane-archer)
    -   [Requirements](#arcane-archer--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#arcane-archer--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#arcane-archer--class-features)
-   [Arcane Trickster](#arcane-trickster)
    -   [Requirements](#arcane-trickster--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#arcane-trickster--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#arcane-trickster--class-features)
-   [Archmage](#archmage)
    -   [Requirements](#archmage--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#archmage--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#archmage--class-features)
-   [Assassin](#assassin)
    -   [Requirements](#assassin--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#assassin--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#assassin--class-features)
    -   [Assassin Spell List](#assassin-spell-list)
-   [Blackguard](#blackguard)
    -   [Requirements](#blackguard--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#blackguard--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#blackguard--class-features)
    -   [Blackguard Spell List](#blackguard-spell-list)
    -   [Corrupt Weapon](#corrupt-weapon)
    -   [Fallen Paladins](#fallen-paladins)
    -   [The Blackguard's Fiendish
        Servant](#the-blackguards-fiendish-servant)
-   [Dragon Disciple](#dragon-disciple)
    -   [Requirements](#dragon-disciple--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#dragon-disciple--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#dragon-disciple--class-features)
-   [Duelist](#duelist)
    -   [Requirements](#duelist--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#duelist--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#duelist--class-features)
-   [Dwarven Defender](#dwarven-defender)
    -   [Requirements](#dwarven-defender--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#dwarven-defender--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#dwarven-defender--class-features)
-   [Eldritch Knight](#eldritch-knight)
    -   [Requirements](#eldritch-knight--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#eldritch-knight--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#eldritch-knight--class-features)
-   [Hierophant](#hierophant)
    -   [Requirements](#hierophant--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#hierophant--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#hierophant--class-features)
-   [Horizon Walker](#horizon-walker)
    -   [Requirements](#horizon-walker--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#horizon-walker--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#horizon-walker--class-features)
    -   [Terrain Mastery Benefits](#terrain-mastery-benefits)
-   [Loremaster](#loremaster)
    -   [Requirements](#loremaster--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#loremaster--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#loremaster--class-features)
-   [Mystic Theurge](#mystic-theurge)
    -   [Requirements](#mystic-theurge--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#mystic-theurge--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#mystic-theurge--class-features)
-   [Shadowdancer](#shadowdancer)
    -   [Requirements](#shadowdancer--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#shadowdancer--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#shadowdancer--class-features)
-   [Thaumaturgist](#thaumaturgist)
    -   [Requirements](#thaumaturgist--requirements)
    -   [Class Skills](#thaumaturgist--class-skills)
    -   [Class Features](#thaumaturgist--class-features)

## Definitions of Terms

Here are definitions of some terms used in this section.

**Base Class:** One of the standard eleven classes.

**Caster Level:** Generally equal to the number of class levels (see
below) in a spellcasting class. Some prestige classes add caster levels
to an existing class.

**Character Level:** The total level of the character, which is the sum
of all class levels held by that character.

**Class Level:** The level of a character in a particular class. For a
character with levels in only one class, class level and character level
are the same.

## Arcane Archer

**Hit Die:** d8.

### Requirements {#arcane-archer--requirements}

To qualify to become an arcane archer, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Race:** Elf or half-elf.

**Base Attack Bonus:** +6.

**Feats:** Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Weapon Focus (longbow or
shortbow).

**Spells:** Ability to cast 1st-level arcane spells.

### Class Skills {#arcane-archer--class-skills}

The arcane archer's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Craft (Int), Hide (Dex). Listen (Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Ride
(Dex), Spot (Wis), Survival (Wis), and Use Rope (Dex).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Level       Base\       Fort\       Ref\        Will\       Special
              Attack\     Save        Save        Save        
              Bonus                                           

  1st         +1          +2          +2          +0          Enhance
                                                              arrow +1

  2nd         +2          +3          +3          +0          Imbue arrow

  3rd         +3          +3          +3          +1          Enhance
                                                              arrow +2

  4th         +4          +4          +4          +1          Seeker
                                                              arrow

  5th         +5          +4          +4          +1          Enhance
                                                              arrow +3

  6th         +6          +5          +5          +2          Phase arrow

  7th         +7          +5          +5          +2          Enhance
                                                              arrow +4

  8th         +8          +6          +6          +2          Hail of
                                                              arrows

  9th         +9          +6          +6          +3          Enhance
                                                              arrow +5

  10th        +10         +7          +7          +3          Arrow of
                                                              death
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

  : Table: The Arcane Archer

### Class Features {#arcane-archer--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the arcane archer prestige
class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** An arcane archer is proficient with
all simple and martial weapons, light armor, medium armor, and shields.

**Enhance Arrow (Su):** At 1st level, every nonmagical arrow an arcane
archer nocks and lets fly becomes magical, gaining a +1 enhancement
bonus. Unlike magic weapons created by normal means, the archer need not
spend experience points or gold pieces to accomplish this task. However,
an archer's magic arrows only function for her. For every two levels the
character advances past 1st level in the prestige class, the magic
arrows she creates gain +1 greater potency (+1 at 1st level, +2 at 3rd
level, +3 at 5th level, +4 at 7th level, and +5 at 9th level).

***Imbue Arrow* (Sp):** At 2nd level, an arcane archer gains the ability
to place an area spell upon an arrow. When the arrow is fired, the
spell's area is centered on where the arrow lands, even if the spell
could normally be centered only on the caster. This ability allows the
archer to use the bow's range rather than the spell's range. It takes a
standard action to cast the spell and fire the arrow. The arrow must be
fired in the round the spell is cast, or the spell is wasted.

***Seeker Arrow* (Sp):** At 4th level, an arcane archer can launch an
arrow once per day at a target known to her within range, and the arrow
travels to the target, even around corners. Only an unavoidable obstacle
or the limit of the arrow's range prevents the arrow's flight. This
ability negates cover and concealment modifiers, but otherwise the
attack is rolled normally. Using this ability is a standard action (and
shooting the arrow is part of the action).

***Phase Arrow* (Sp):** At 6th level, an arcane archer can launch an
arrow once per day at a target known to her within range, and the arrow
travels to the target in a straight path, passing through any nonmagical
barrier or wall in its way. (Any magical barrier stops the arrow.) This
ability negates cover, concealment, and even armor modifiers, but
otherwise the attack is rolled normally.

Using this ability is a standard action (and shooting the arrow is part
of the action).

***Hail of Arrows* (Sp):** In lieu of her regular attacks, once per day
an arcane archer of 8th level or higher can fire an arrow at each and
every target within range, to a maximum of one target for every arcane
archer level she has earned. Each attack uses the archer's primary
attack bonus, and each enemy may only be targeted by a single arrow.

***Arrow of Death* (Sp):** At 10th level, an arcane archer can create an
*arrow of death* that forces the target, if damaged by the arrow's
attack, to make a DC 20 Fortitude save or be slain immediately. It takes
one day to make an *arrow of death*, and the arrow only functions for
the arcane archer who created it. The *arrow of death* lasts no longer
than one year, and the archer can only have one such arrow in existence
at a time.

## Arcane Trickster

**Hit Die:** d4.

### Requirements {#arcane-trickster--requirements}

To qualify to become an arcane trickster, a character must fulfill all
of the following criteria.

**Alignment:** Any nonlawful.

**Skills:** Decipher Script 7 ranks, Disable Device 7 ranks, Escape
Artist 7 ranks, Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks.

**Spells:** Ability to cast *mage hand* and at least one arcane spell of
3rd level or higher.

**Special:** Sneak attack +2d6.

### Class Skills {#arcane-trickster--class-skills}

The arcane trickster's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Appraise (Int), Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Climb (Str),
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Diplomacy
(Cha), Disable Device (Int), Disguise (Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Gather
Information (Cha), Hide (Dex), Jump (Str), Knowledge (all skills taken
individually) (Int), Listen (Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Open Lock (Dex),
Profession (Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), Search (Int), Sleight of Hand
(Dex), Speak Language (Int), Spellcraft (Int), Spot (Wis), Swim (Str),
Tumble (Dex), and Use Rope (Dex).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ------------- ----------
  Level      Base\      Fort\      Ref\       Will\      Special       Spells per
             Attack\    Save       Save       Save                     Day
             Bonus                                                     

  1st        +0         +0         +2         +2         Ranged        +1 level
                                                         legerdemain   of
                                                         1/day         existing
                                                                       class

  2nd        +1         +0         +3         +3         Sneak attack  +1 level
                                                         +1d6          of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       class

  3rd        +1         +1         +3         +3         Impromptu     +1 level
                                                         sneak attack  of
                                                         1/day         existing
                                                                       class

  4th        +2         +1         +4         +4         Sneak attack  +1 level
                                                         +2d6          of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       class

  5th        +2         +1         +4         +4         Ranged        +1 level
                                                         legerdemain   of
                                                         2/day         existing
                                                                       class

  6th        +3         +2         +5         +5         Sneak attack  +1 level
                                                         +3d6          of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       class

  7th        +3         +2         +5         +5         Impromptu     +1 level
                                                         sneak attack  of
                                                         2/day         existing
                                                                       class

  8th        +4         +2         +6         +6         Sneak attack  +1 level
                                                         +4d6          of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       class

  9th        +4         +3         +6         +6         Ranged        +1 level
                                                         legerdemain   of
                                                         3/day         existing
                                                                       class

  10th       +5         +3         +7         +7         Sneak attack  +1 level
                                                         +5d6          of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       class
  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ------------- ----------

  : Table: The Arcane Trickster

### Class Features {#arcane-trickster--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the arcane trickster prestige
class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Arcane tricksters gain no proficiency
with any weapon or armor.

**Spells per Day:** When a new arcane trickster level is gained, the
character gains new spells per day as if he had also gained a level in a
spellcasting class he belonged to before adding the prestige class. He
does not, however, gain any other benefit a character of that class
would have gained, except for an increased effective level of
spellcasting. If a character had more than one spellcasting class before
becoming an arcane trickster, he must decide to which class he adds the
new level for purposes of determining spells per day.

**Ranged Legerdemain:** An arcane trickster can perform one of the
following class skills at a range of 30 feet: Disable Device, Open Lock,
or Sleight of Hand. Working at a distance increases the normal skill
check DC by 5, and an arcane trickster cannot take 10 on this check. Any
object to be manipulated must weigh 5 pounds or less.

An arcane trickster can use ranged legerdemain once per day initially,
twice per day upon attaining 5th level, and three times per day at 9th
level or higher. He can make only one ranged legerdemain skill check
each day, and only if he has at least 1 rank in the skill being used.

**Sneak Attack:** This is exactly like the rogue ability of the same
name. The extra damage dealt increases by +1d6 every other level (2nd,
4th, 6th, 8th, and 10th). If an arcane trickster gets a sneak attack
bonus from another source the bonuses on damage stack.

**Impromptu Sneak Attack:** Beginning at 3rd level, once per day an
arcane trickster can declare one melee or ranged attack he makes to be a
sneak attack (the target can be no more than 30 feet distant if the
impromptu sneak attack is a ranged attack). The target of an impromptu
sneak attack loses any Dexterity bonus to AC, but only against that
attack. The power can be used against any target, but creatures that are
not subject to critical hits take no extra damage (though they still
lose any Dexterity bonus to AC against the attack).

At 7th level, an arcane trickster can use this ability twice per day.

## Archmage

**Hit Die:** d4.

### Requirements {#archmage--requirements}

To qualify to become an archmage, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Skills:** Knowledge (arcana) 15 ranks, Spellcraft 15 ranks.

**Feats:** Skill Focus (Spellcraft), Spell Focus in two schools of
magic.

**Spells:** Ability to cast 7th-level arcane spells, knowledge of
5th-level or higher spells from at least five schools.

### Class Skills {#archmage--class-skills}

The archmage's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (alchemy) (Int), Knowledge (all skills taken
individually) (Int), Profession (Wis), Search (Int), and Spellcraft
(Int).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  -------- --------- -------- -------- -------- --------- -------------- --------
  Level    Base\     Fort\    Ref\     Will\    Special   Spells per Day 
           Attack\   Save     Save     Save                              
           Bonus                                                         

  1st      +0        +0       +0       +2       High      +1 level of    
                                                arcana    existing       
                                                          arcane         
                                                          spellcasting   
                                                          class          

  2nd      +1        +0       +0       +3       High      +1 level of    
                                                arcana    existing       
                                                          arcane         
                                                          spellcasting   
                                                          class          

  3rd      +1        +1       +1       +3       High      +1level of     
                                                arcana    existing       
                                                          arcane         
                                                          spellcasting   
                                                          class          

  4th      +2        +1       +1       +4       High      +1 level of    
                                                arcana    existing       
                                                          arcane         
                                                          spellcasting   
                                                          class          

  5th      +2        +1       +1       +4       High      +1 level of    
                                                arcana    existing       
                                                          arcane         
                                                          spellcasting   
                                                          class          
  -------- --------- -------- -------- -------- --------- -------------- --------

  : Table: The Archmage

### Class Features {#archmage--class-features}

All the following are **Class Features** of the archmage prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Archmages gain no proficiency with any
weapon or armor.

**Spells per Day/Spells Known:** When a new archmage level is gained,
the character gains new spells per day (and spells known, if applicable)
as if he had also gained a level in whatever arcane spellcasting class
in which he could cast 7th-level spells before he added the prestige
class level. He does not, however, gain any other benefit a character of
that class would have gained. If a character had more than one arcane
spellcasting class in which he could cast 7th-level spells before he
became an archmage, he must decide to which class he adds each level of
archmage for the purpose of determining spells per day.

**High Arcana:** An archmage gains the opportunity to select a special
ability from among those described below by permanently eliminating one
existing spell slot (she cannot eliminate a spell slot of higher level
than the highest-level spell she can cast). Each special ability has a
minimum required spell slot level, as specified in its description.

An archmage may choose to eliminate a spell slot of a higher level than
that required to gain a type of high arcana.

*Arcane Fire (Su):* The archmage gains the ability to change arcane
spell energy into arcane fire, manifesting it as a bolt of raw magical
energy. The bolt is a ranged touch attack with long range (400 feet + 40
feet/level of archmage) that deals 1d6 points of damage per class level
of the archmage plus 1d6 points of damage per level of the spell used to
create the effect. This ability costs one 9th-level spell slot.

*Arcane Reach (Su):* The archmage can use spells with a range of touch
on a target up to 30 feet away. The archmage must make a ranged touch
attack. Arcane reach can be selected a second time as a special ability,
in which case the range increases to 60 feet. This ability costs one
7th-level spell slot.

*Mastery of Counterspelling:* When the archmage counterspells a spell,
it is turned back upon the caster as if it were fully affected by a
*spell turning* spell. If the spell cannot be affected by *spell
turning*, then it is merely counterspelled. This ability costs one
7th-level spell slot.

*Mastery of Elements:* The archmage can alter an arcane spell when cast
so that it utilizes a different element from the one it normally uses.
This ability can only alter a spell with the acid, cold, fire,
electricity, or sonic descriptor. The spell's casting time is
unaffected. The caster decides whether to alter the spell's energy type
and chooses the new energy type when he begins casting. This ability
costs one 8th-level spell slot.

*Mastery of Shaping:* The archmage can alter area and effect spells that
use one of the following shapes: burst, cone, cylinder, emanation, or
spread. The alteration consists of creating spaces within the spell's
area or effect that are not subject to the spell. The minimum dimension
for these spaces is a 5-foot cube. Furthermore, any shapeable spells
have a minimum dimension of 5 feet instead of 10 feet. This ability
costs one 6th-level spell slot.

*Spell Power:* This ability increases the archmage's effective caster
level by +1 (for purposes of determining level-dependent spell variables
such as damage dice or range, and caster level checks only). This
ability costs one 5th-level spell slot.

*Spell-Like Ability:* An archmage who selects this type of high arcana
can use one of her arcane spell slots (other than a slot expended to
learn this or any other type of high arcana) to permanently prepare one
of her arcane spells as a spell-like ability that can be used twice per
day. The archmage does not use any components when casting the spell,
although a spell that costs XP to cast still does so and a spell with a
costly material component instead costs her 10 times that amount in XP.
This ability costs one 5th-level spell slot.

The spell-like ability normally uses a spell slot of the spell's level,
although the archmage can choose to make a spell modified by a metamagic
feat into a spell-like ability at the appropriate spell level.

The archmage may use an available higher-level spell slot in order to
use the spell-like ability more often. Using a slot three levels higher
than the chosen spell allows her to use the spell-like ability four
times per day, and a slot six levels higher lets her use it six times
per day.

If spell-like ability is selected more than one time as a high arcana
choice, this ability can apply to the same spell chosen the first time
(increasing the number of times per day it can be used) or to a
different spell.

## Assassin

**Hit Die:** d6.

### Requirements {#assassin--requirements}

To qualify to become an assassin, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Alignment:** Any evil.

**Skills:** Disguise 4 ranks, Hide 8 ranks, Move Silently 8 ranks.

**Special:** The character must kill someone for no other reason than to
join the assassins.

### Class Skills {#assassin--class-skills}

The assassin's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Climb (Str), Craft (Int), Decipher Script
(Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Disable Device (Int), Disguise (Cha), Escape
Artist (Dex), Forgery (Int), Gather Information (Cha), Hide (Dex),
Intimidate (Cha), Jump (Str), Listen (Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Open
Lock (Dex), Search (Int), Sense Motive (Wis), Sleight of Hand (Dex),
Spot (Wis), Swim (Str), Tumble (Dex), Use Magic Device (Cha), and Use
Rope (Dex).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

  ------- --------- ------- ------- ------- ---------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- ------- -------
                                                                                                       []{style="                                                                 
                                                                                                            display: block;                                                       
                                                                                                          position: absolute;                                                     
                                                                                                               right: 0;                                                          
                                                                                                               top: 50%;                                                          
                                                                                                               left: 0px;                                                         
                                                                                                  border-top: 1px solid currentColor;                                             
                                                                                                          "}[Spells per Day                                                       
                                                        ]{style="background-color: #fff; display: inline-block; z-index: 1; position: relative; padding: 0 8px"}                  

  Level   Base\     Fort\   Ref\    Will\   Special                                                       1st                                                       2nd     3rd     4th
          Attack\   Save    Save    Save                                                                                                                                          
          Bonus                                                                                                                                                                   

  1st     +0        +0      +2      +0      Sneak                                                          0                                                        ---     ---     ---
                                            attack                                                                                                                                
                                            +1d6,                                                                                                                                 
                                            death                                                                                                                                 
                                            attack,                                                                                                                               
                                            poison                                                                                                                                
                                            use,                                                                                                                                  
                                            spells                                                                                                                                

  2nd     +1        +0      +3      +0      +1 save                                                        1                                                        ---     ---     ---
                                            against                                                                                                                               
                                            poison,                                                                                                                               
                                            uncanny                                                                                                                               
                                            dodge                                                                                                                                 

  3rd     +2        +1      +3      +1      Sneak                                                          2                                                         0      ---     ---
                                            attack                                                                                                                                
                                            +2d6                                                                                                                                  

  4th     +3        +1      +4      +1      +2 save                                                        3                                                         1      ---     ---
                                            against                                                                                                                               
                                            poison                                                                                                                                

  5th     +3        +1      +4      +1      Improved                                                       3                                                         2       0      ---
                                            uncanny                                                                                                                               
                                            dodge,                                                                                                                                
                                            sneak                                                                                                                                 
                                            attack                                                                                                                                
                                            +3d6                                                                                                                                  

  6th     +4        +2      +5      +2      +3 save                                                        3                                                         3       1      ---
                                            against                                                                                                                               
                                            poison                                                                                                                                

  7th     +5        +2      +5      +2      Sneak                                                          3                                                         3       2       0
                                            attack                                                                                                                                
                                            +4d6                                                                                                                                  

  8th     +6        +2      +6      +2      +4 save                                                        3                                                         3       3       1
                                            against                                                                                                                               
                                            poison,                                                                                                                               
                                            hide in                                                                                                                               
                                            plain                                                                                                                                 
                                            sight                                                                                                                                 

  9th     +6        +3      +6      +3      Sneak                                                          3                                                         3       3       2
                                            attack                                                                                                                                
                                            +5d6                                                                                                                                  

  10th    +7        +3      +7      +3      +5 save                                                        3                                                         3       3       3
                                            against                                                                                                                               
                                            poison                                                                                                                                
  ------- --------- ------- ------- ------- ---------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- ------- -------

  : Table: The Assassin

### Class Features {#assassin--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the assassin prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Assassins are proficient with the
crossbow (hand, light, or heavy), dagger (any type), dart, rapier, sap,
shortbow (normal and composite), and short sword. Assassins are
proficient with light armor but not with shields.

**Sneak Attack:** This is exactly like the rogue ability of the same
name. The extra damage dealt increases by +1d6 every other level (2nd,
4th, 6th, 8th, and 10th). If an assassin gets a sneak attack bonus from
another source the bonuses on damage stack.

**Death Attack:** If an assassin studies his victim for 3 rounds and
then makes a sneak attack with a melee weapon that successfully deals
damage, the sneak attack has the additional effect of possibly either
paralyzing or killing the target (assassin's choice). While studying the
victim, the assassin can undertake other actions so long as his
attention stays focused on the target and the target does not detect the
assassin or recognize the assassin as an enemy. If the victim of such an
attack fails a Fortitude save (DC 10 + the assassin's class level + the
assassin's Int modifier) against the kill effect, she dies. If the
saving throw fails against the paralysis effect, the victim is rendered
helpless and unable to act for 1d6 rounds plus 1 round per level of the
assassin. If the victim's saving throw succeeds, the attack is just a
normal sneak attack. Once the assassin has completed the 3 rounds of
study, he must make the death attack within the next 3 rounds.

If a death attack is attempted and fails (the victim makes her save) or
if the assassin does not launch the attack within 3 rounds of completing
the study, 3 new rounds of study are required before he can attempt
another death attack.

**Poison Use:** Assassins are trained in the use of poison and never
risk accidentally poisoning themselves when applying poison to a blade.

**Spells:** Beginning at 1st level, an assassin gains the ability to
cast a number of arcane spells. To cast a spell, an assassin must have
an Intelligence score of at least 10 + the spell's level, so an assassin
with an Intelligence of 10 or lower cannot cast these spells. Assassin
bonus spells are based on Intelligence, and saving throws against these
spells have a DC of 10 + spell level + the assassin's Intelligence
bonus. When the assassin gets 0 spells per day of a given spell level he
gains only the bonus spells he would be entitled to based on his
Intelligence score for that spell level.

The assassin's spell list appears below. An assassin casts spells just
as a bard does.

Upon reaching 6th level, at every even-numbered level after that (8th
and 10th), an assassin can choose to learn a new spell in place of one
he already knows. The new spell's level must be the same as that of the
spell being exchanged, and it must be at least two levels lower than the
highest-level assassin spell the assassin can cast. An assassin may swap
only a single spell at any given level, and must choose whether or not
to swap the spell at the same time that he gains new spells known for
that level.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------
                                                                                                                                                            []{style="                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                 display: block;                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                               position: absolute;                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                    right: 0;                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                    top: 50%;                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                    left: 0px;                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                       border-top: 1px solid currentColor;                                                                 
                                                                                                            "}[Spells Known ]{style="background-color: #fff; display: inline-block; z-index: 1; position: relative; padding: 0 8px"}                       
  Level                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1st    2nd    3rd    4th
  1st                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2^1^   ---    ---    ---
  2nd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3     ---    ---    ---
  3rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3     2^1^   ---    ---
  4th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4      3     ---    ---
  5th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4      3     2^1^   ---
  6th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4      4      3     ---
  7th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4      4      3     2^1^
  8th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4      4      4      3
  9th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4      4      4      3
  10th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4      4      4      4
  1 Provided the assassin has sufficient Intelligence to have a bonus spell of this level.                                                                                                                                                                 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------

  : Table: Assassin Spells Known

**Save Bonus against Poison:** The assassin gains a natural saving throw
bonus to all poisons gained at 2nd level that increases by +1 for every
two additional levels the assassin gains.

**Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** Starting at 2nd level, an assassin retains his
Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) regardless of being caught flat-footed or
struck by an invisible attacker. (He still loses any Dexterity bonus to
AC if immobilized.)

If a character gains uncanny dodge from a second class the character
automatically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below).

**Improved Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** At 5th level, an assassin can no longer
be flanked, since he can react to opponents on opposite sides of him as
easily as he can react to a single attacker. This defense denies rogues
the ability to use flank attacks to sneak attack the assassin. The
exception to this defense is that a rogue at least four levels higher
than the assassin can flank him (and thus sneak attack him).

If a character gains uncanny dodge (see above) from a second class the
character automatically gains improved uncanny dodge, and the levels
from those classes stack to determine the minimum rogue level required
to flank the character.

**Hide in Plain Sight (Su):** At 8th level, an assassin can use the Hide
skill even while being observed. As long as he is within 10 feet of some
sort of shadow, an assassin can hide himself from view in the open
without having anything to actually hide behind.

He cannot, however, hide in his own shadow.

### Assassin Spell List

Assassins choose their spells from the following list:

1st Level: *disguise self, detect poison, feather fall, ghost sound,
jump, obscuring mist, sleep, true strike.*

2nd Level: *alter self, cat's grace, darkness, fox's cunning, illusory
script, invisibility, pass without trace, spider climb, undetectable
alignment.*

3rd Level: *deep slumber, deeper darkness, false life, magic circle
against good, misdirection, nondetection.*

4th Level: *clairaudience/clairvoyance, dimension door, freedom of
movement, glibness, greater invisibility, locate creature, modify
memory, poison.*

## Blackguard

**Hit Die:** d10.

### Requirements {#blackguard--requirements}

To qualify to become a blackguard, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Alignment:** Any evil.

**Base Attack Bonus:** +6.

**Skills:** Hide 5 ranks, Knowledge (religion) 2 ranks.

**Feats:** Cleave, Improved Sunder, Power Attack.

**Special:** The character must have made peaceful contact with an evil
outsider who was summoned by him or someone else.

### Class Skills {#blackguard--class-skills}

The blackguard's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal (Cha),
Heal (Wis), Hide (Dex), Intimidate (Cha), Knowledge (religion) (Int),
Profession (Wis), and Ride (Dex).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  ------- --------- ------- ------- ------- ----------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- ------- -------
                                                                                                        []{style="                                                                 
                                                                                                             display: block;                                                       
                                                                                                           position: absolute;                                                     
                                                                                                                right: 0;                                                          
                                                                                                                top: 50%;                                                          
                                                                                                                left: 0px;                                                         
                                                                                                   border-top: 1px solid currentColor;                                             
                                                                                                           "}[Spells per Day                                                       
                                                         ]{style="background-color: #fff; display: inline-block; z-index: 1; position: relative; padding: 0 8px"}                  

  Level   Base\     Fort\   Ref\    Will\   Special                                                        1st                                                       2nd     3rd     4th
          Attack\   Save    Save    Save                                                                                                                                           
          Bonus                                                                                                                                                                    

  1st     +1        +2      0       0       Aura of                                                         0                                                        ---     ---     ---
                                            evil,                                                                                                                                  
                                            *detect                                                                                                                                
                                            good*,                                                                                                                                 
                                            poison use                                                                                                                             

  2nd     +2        +3      0       0       Dark                                                            1                                                        ---     ---     ---
                                            blessing,                                                                                                                              
                                            smite good                                                                                                                             
                                            1/day                                                                                                                                  

  3rd     +3        +3      +1      +1      Command                                                         1                                                         0      ---     ---
                                            undead,                                                                                                                                
                                            aura of                                                                                                                                
                                            despair                                                                                                                                

  4th     +4        +4      +1      +1      Sneak                                                           1                                                         1      ---     ---
                                            attack +1d6                                                                                                                            

  5th     +5        +4      +1      +1      Fiendish                                                        1                                                         1       0      ---
                                            servant,                                                                                                                               
                                            smite good                                                                                                                             
                                            2/day                                                                                                                                  

  6th     +6        +5      +2      +2                                                                      1                                                         1       1      ---

  7th     +7        +5      +2      +2      Sneak                                                           2                                                         1       1       0
                                            attack +2d6                                                                                                                            

  8th     +8        +6      +2      +2                                                                      2                                                         1       1       1

  9th     +9        +6      +3      +3                                                                      2                                                         2       1       1

  10th    +10       +7      +3      +3      Sneak                                                           2                                                         2       2       1
                                            attack                                                                                                                                 
                                            +3d6, smite                                                                                                                            
                                            good 3/day                                                                                                                             
  ------- --------- ------- ------- ------- ----------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- ------- -------

  : Table: The Blackguard

### Class Features {#blackguard--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the blackguard prestige
class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Blackguards are proficient with all
simple and martial weapons, with all types of armor, and with shields.

**Aura of Evil (Ex):** The power of a blackguard's aura of evil (see the
*detect evil* spell) is equal to his class level plus his cleric level,
if any.

***Detect Good* (Sp):** At will, a blackguard can use *detect good* as a
spell-like ability, duplicating the effect of the *detect good* spell.

**Poison Use:** Blackguards are skilled in the use of poison and never
risk accidentally poisoning themselves when applying poison to a blade.

**Dark Blessing (Su):** A blackguard applies his Charisma modifier (if
positive) as a bonus on all saving throws.

**Spells:** A blackguard has the ability to cast a small number of
divine spells. To cast a blackguard spell, a blackguard must have a
Wisdom score of at least 10 + the spell's level, so a blackguard with a
Wisdom of 10 or lower cannot cast these spells.

Blackguard bonus spells are based on Wisdom, and saving throws against
these spells have a DC of 10 + spell level + the blackguard's Wisdom
modifier. When the blackguard gets 0 spells per day of a given spell
level he gains only the bonus spells he would be entitled to based on
his Wisdom score for that spell level. The blackguard's spell list
appears below. A blackguard has access to any spell on the list and can
freely choose which to prepare, just as a cleric. A blackguard prepares
and casts spells just as a cleric does (though a blackguard cannot
spontaneously cast *cure* or *inflict* spells).

**Smite Good (Su):** Once a day, a blackguard of 2nd level or higher may
attempt to smite good with one normal melee attack.

He adds his Charisma modifier (if positive) to his attack roll and deals
1 extra point of damage per class level. If a blackguard accidentally
smites a creature that is not good, the smite has no effect but it is
still used up for that day.

At 5th level, and again at 10th level, a blackguard may smite good one
additional time per day.

**Aura of Despair (Su):** Beginning at 3rd level, the blackguard
radiates a malign aura that causes enemies within 10 feet of him to take
a --2 penalty on all saving throws.

**Command Undead (Su):** When a blackguard reaches 3rd level, he gains
the supernatural ability to command and rebuke undead. He commands
undead as would a cleric of two levels lower.

**Sneak Attack:** This ability, gained at 4th level, is like the rogue
ability of the same name. The extra damage increases by +1d6 every third
level beyond 4th (7th and 10th). If a blackguard gets a sneak attack
bonus from another source the bonuses on damage stack.

### Blackguard Spell List

Blackguards choose their spells from the following list:

1st Level: *cause fear, corrupt weapon, cure light wounds, doom, inflict
light wounds, magic weapon, summon monster I\*.*

2nd Level: *bull's strength, cure moderate wounds, darkness, death
knell, eagle's splendor, inflict moderate wounds, shatter, summon
monster II\*.*

3rd Level: *contagion, cure serious wounds, deeper darkness, inflict
serious wounds, protection from elements, summon monster III\*.*

4th Level: *cure critical wounds, freedom of movement, inflict critical
wounds, poison, summon monster IV\*.*

\* Evil creatures only.

### Corrupt Weapon

Blackguards have access to a special spell, *corrupt weapon,* which is
the opposing counterpart of the paladin spell *bless weapon*. Instead of
improving a weapon's effectiveness against evil foes *corrupt weapon*
makes a weapon more effective against good foes.

### Fallen Paladins

Blackguards who have levels in the paladin class (that is to say, are
now ex-paladins) gain extra abilities the more levels of paladin they
have.

A fallen paladin who becomes a blackguard gains all of the following
abilities that apply, according to the number of paladin levels the
character has.

1--2: Smite good 1/day. (This is in addition to the ability granted to
all blackguards at 2nd level.

3--4: Lay on hands. Once per day, the blackguard can use this
supernatural ability to cure himself or his fiendish servant of damage
equal to his Charisma bonus x his level.

5--6: Sneak attack damage increased by +1d6. Smite good 2/day.

7--8: Fiendish summoning. Once per day, the blackguard can use a *summon
monster I* spell to call forth an evil creature. For this spell, the
caster level is double the blackguard's class level.

9--10: Undead companion. In addition to the fiendish servant, the
blackguard gains (at 5th level) a Medium-size skeleton or zombie as a
companion. This companion cannot be turned or rebuked and gains all
special bonuses as a fiendish servant when the blackguard gains levels.
Smite good 3/day.

11 or more: A fallen paladin of this stature immediately gains a
blackguard level for each level of paladin he trades in.

The character level of the character does not change. With the loss of
paladin levels, the character no longer gains as many extra abilities
for being a fallen paladin.

### The Blackguard's Fiendish Servant

Upon or after reaching 5th level, a blackguard can call a fiendish bat,
cat, dire rat, horse, pony, raven, or toad to serve him. The
blackguard's servant further gains HD and special abilities based on the
blackguard's character level (see the table below).

A blackguard may have only one fiendish servant at a time.

Should the blackguard's servant die, he may call for another one after a
year and a day. The new fiendish servant has all the accumulated
abilities due a servant of the blackguard's current level.

  ------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ------------
  Character    Bonus\      Natural\    Str\        Int         Special
  Level        HD          Armor Adj.  Adj.                    

  12th or      +2          +1          +1          6           Empathic
  lower                                                        link,
                                                               improved
                                                               evasion,
                                                               share saving
                                                               throws,
                                                               share spells

  13th--15th   +4          +3          +2          7           Speak with
                                                               blackguard

  16th--18th   +6          +5          +3          8           Blood bond

  19th--20th   +8          +7          +4          9           Spell
                                                               resistance
  ------------ ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ------------

*Character Level:* The character level of the blackguard (his blackguard
level plus his original class level).

*Bonus HD:* Extra eight-sided (d8) Hit Dice, each of which gains a
Constitution modifier, as normal. Extra Hit Dice improve the servant's
base attack and base save bonuses, as normal.

*Natural Armor Adj.:* This is an improvement to the servant's existing
natural armor bonus.

*Str Adj.:* Add this figure to the servant's Strength score.

*Int:* The servant's Intelligence score. (A fiendish servant is smarter
than normal animals of its kind.)

The abilities mentioned in the "Special" column of the accompanying
table are described below.

**Empathic Link (Su):** The blackguard has an empathic link with his
servant out to a distance of up to 1 mile. The blackguard cannot see
through the servant's eyes, but they can communicate empathically.
Because of the limited nature of the link, only general emotional
content can be communicated.

Because of the empathic link between the servant and the blackguard, the
blackguard has the same connection to a place or an item that the
servant does.

**Improved Evasion (Ex):** If the servant is subjected to an attack that
normally allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, it takes no
damage on a successful saving throw and only half damage on a failed
saving throw. Improved evasion is an extraordinary ability.

**Share Saving Throws:** For each of its saving throws, the servant uses
either its own base save bonus or the blackguard's, whichever is higher.
The servant applies its own ability modifiers to saves, and it doesn't
share any other bonuses on saves that the blackguard might have.

**Share Spells:** At the blackguard's option, he may have any spell (but
not any spell-like ability) he casts on himself also affect his servant.
The servant must be within 5 feet at the time of casting to receive the
benefit. If the spell has a duration other than instantaneous, it stops
affecting the servant if it moves farther than 5 feet away and will not
affect the servant again even if the servant returns to the blackguard
before the duration expires. Additionally, the blackguard may cast a
spell with a target of "You" on his servant (as a touch range spell)
instead of on himself. A blackguard and his servant can share spells
even if the spells normally do not affect creatures of the servant's
type (magical beast).

**Speak with Blackguard (Ex):** If the blackguard's character level is
13th or higher, the blackguard and servant can communicate verbally as
if they were using a common language. Other creatures do not understand
the communication without magical help.

**Blood Bond (Ex):** If the blackguard's character level is 16th or
higher, the servant gains a +2 bonus on all attack rolls, checks, and
saves if it witnesses the blackguard being threatened or harmed.

This bonus lasts as long as the threat is immediate and apparent.

**Spell Resistance (Ex):** If the blackguard's character level is 19th
or higher, the servant gains spell resistance equal to the blackguard's
level + 5. To affect the servant with a spell, another spellcaster must
get a result on a caster level check (1d20 + caster level) that equals
or exceeds the servant's spell resistance.

## Dragon Disciple

**Hit Die:** d12.

### Requirements {#dragon-disciple--requirements}

To qualify to become a dragon disciple, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Race:** Any nondragon (cannot already be a half-dragon).

**Skills:** Knowledge (arcana) 8 ranks.

**Languages:** Draconic.

**Spellcasting:** Ability to cast arcane spells without preparation.

**Special:** The player chooses a dragon variety when taking the first
level in this prestige class.

### Class Skills {#dragon-disciple--class-skills}

The dragon disciple's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Escape Artist
(Dex), Gather Information (Cha), Knowledge (all skills, taken
individually) (Int) Listen (Wis), Profession (Wis), Search (Int), Speak
Language (Int), Spellcraft (Int), and Spot (Wis).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ------------ ----------
  Level      Base\      Fort\      Ref\       Will\      Special      Bonus
             Attack\    Save       Save       Save                    Spells
             Bonus                                                    

  1st        +0         +2         +0         +2         Natural      1
                                                         armor        
                                                         increase     
                                                         (+1)         

  2nd        +1         +3         +0         +3         Ability      1
                                                         boost (Str   
                                                         +2), claws   
                                                         and bite     

  3rd        +2         +3         +1         +3         Breath       0
                                                         weapon (2d8) 

  4th        +3         +4         +1         +4         Ability      1
                                                         boost (Str   
                                                         +2), natural 
                                                         armor        
                                                         increase     
                                                         (+2)         

  5th        +3         +4         +1         +4         Blindsense   1
                                                         30 ft.       

  6th        +4         +5         +2         +5         Ability      1
                                                         boost (Con   
                                                         +2)          

  7th        +5         +5         +2         +5         Breath       0
                                                         weapon       
                                                         (4d8),       
                                                         natural      
                                                         armor        
                                                         increase     
                                                         (+3)         

  8th        +6         +6         +2         +6         Ability      1
                                                         boost (Int   
                                                         +2)          

  9th        +6         +6         +3         +6         Wings        1

  10th       +7         +7         +3         +7         Blindsense   0
                                                         60 ft.,      
                                                         dragon       
                                                         apotheosis   
  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ------------ ----------

  : Table: The Dragon Disciple

### Class Features {#dragon-disciple--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the dragon disciple prestige
class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Dragon disciples gain no proficiency
with any weapon or armor.

**Bonus Spells:** Dragon disciples gain bonus spells as they gain levels
in this prestige class, as if from having a high ability score, as given
on Table: The Dragon Disciple. A bonus spell can be added to any level
of spells the disciple already has the ability to cast.

If a character has more than one spellcasting class, he must decide to
which class he adds each bonus spell as it is gained. Once a bonus spell
has been applied, it cannot be shifted.

**Natural Armor Increase (Ex):** At 1st, 4th, and 7th level, a gains an
increase to the character's existing natural armor (if any), as
indicated on Table: The Dragon Disciple (the numbers represent the total
increase gained to that point). As his skin thickens, a dragon disciple
takes on more and more of his progenitor's physical aspect.

**Claws and Bite (Ex):** At 2nd level, a dragon disciple gains claw and
bite attacks if he does not already have them. Use the values below or
the disciple's base claw and bite damage values, whichever are greater.

  -------- ------------- -------------
  Size     Bite Damage   Claw Damage
  Small    1d4           1d3
  Medium   1d6           1d4
  Large    1d8           1d6
  -------- ------------- -------------

A dragon disciple is considered proficient with these attacks. When
making a full attack, a dragon disciple uses his full base attack bonus
with his bite attack but takes a --5 penalty on claw attacks. The
Multiattack feat reduces this penalty to only --2.

**Ability Boost (Ex):** As a dragon disciple gains levels in this
prestige class, his ability scores increase as noted on Table: The
Dragon Disciple.

These increases stack and are gained as if through level advancement.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** At 3rd level, a dragon disciple gains a minor
breath weapon. The type and shape depend on the dragon variety whose
heritage he enjoys (see below). Regardless of the ancestor, the breath
weapon deals 2d8 points of damage of the appropriate energy type.

At 7th level, the damage increases to 4d8, and when a disciple attains
dragon apotheosis at 10th level it reaches its full power at 6d8.
Regardless of its strength, the breath weapon can be used only once per
day. Use all the rules for dragon breath weapons except as specified
here.

The DC of the breath weapon is 10 + class level + Con modifier.

A line-shaped breath weapon is 5 feet high, 5 feet wide, and 60 feet
long. A cone-shaped breath weapon is 30 feet long.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------
  Dragon Variety\*                                                                                 Breath Weapon
  Black                                                                                            Line of acid
  Blue                                                                                             Line of lightning
  Green                                                                                            Cone of corrosive gas (acid)
  Red                                                                                              Cone of fire
  White                                                                                            Cone of cold
  Brass                                                                                            Line of fire
  Bronze                                                                                           Line of lightning
  Copper                                                                                           Line of acid
  Gold                                                                                             Cone of fire
  Silver                                                                                           Cone of cold
  \* Other varieties of dragon disciple are possible, using other dragon varieties as ancestors.   
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------

**Blindsense (Ex):** At 5th level, the dragon disciple gains blindsense
with a range of 30 feet. Using nonvisual senses the dragon disciple
notices things it cannot see. He usually does not need to make Spot or
Listen checks to notice and pinpoint the location of creatures within
range of his blindsense ability, provided that he has line of effect to
that creature.

Any opponent the dragon disciple cannot see still has total concealment
against him, and the dragon disciple still has the normal miss chance
when attacking foes that have concealment. Visibility still affects the
movement of a creature with blindsense. A creature with blindsense is
still denied its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class against attacks from
creatures it cannot see. At 10th level, the range of this ability
increases to 60 feet.

**Wings (Ex):** At 9th level, a dragon disciple grows a set of draconic
wings. He may now fly at a speed equal to his normal land speed, with
average maneuverability.

**Dragon Apotheosis:** At 10th level, a dragon disciple takes on the
half-dragon template. His breath weapon reaches full strength (as noted
above), and he gains +4 to Strength and +2 to Charisma. His natural
armor bonus increases to +4, and he acquires low-light vision, 60-foot
darkvision, immunity to *sleep* and paralysis effects, and immunity to
the energy type used by his breath weapon (see above).

## Duelist

**Hit Die:** d10.

### Requirements {#duelist--requirements}

To qualify to become a duelist, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Base Attack Bonus:** +6.

**Skills:** Perform 3 ranks, Tumble 5 ranks.

**Feats:** Dodge, Mobility, Weapon Finesse.

### Class Skills {#duelist--class-skills}

The duelist's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Jump (Str), Listen
(Wis), Perform (Cha), Sense Motive (Wis), Spot (Wis), and Tumble (Dex).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Level       Base\       Fort\       Ref\        Will\       Special
              Attack\     Save        Save        Save        
              Bonus                                           

  1st         +1          +0          +2          +0          Canny
                                                              defense

  2nd         +2          +0          +3          +0          Improved
                                                              reaction +2

  3rd         +3          +1          +3          +1          Enhanced
                                                              mobility

  4th         +4          +1          +4          +1          Grace

  5th         +5          +1          +4          +1          Precise
                                                              strike +1d6

  6th         +6          +2          +5          +2          Acrobatic
                                                              charge

  7th         +7          +2          +5          +2          Elaborate
                                                              parry

  8th         +8          +2          +6          +2          Improved
                                                              reaction +4

  9th         +9          +3          +6          +3          Deflect
                                                              Arrows

  10th        +10         +3          +7          +3          Precise
                                                              strike +2d6
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

  : Table: The Duelist

### Class Features {#duelist--class-features}

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** The duelist is proficient with all
simple and martial weapons, but no type of armor or shield.

**Canny Defense (Ex):** When not wearing armor or using a shield, a
duelist adds 1 point of Intelligence bonus (if any) per duelist class
level to her Dexterity bonus to modify Armor Class while wielding a
melee weapon. If a duelist is caught flat-footed or otherwise denied her
Dexterity bonus, she also loses this bonus.

**Improved Reaction (Ex):** At 2nd level, a duelist gains a +2 bonus on
initiative checks.

At 8th level, the bonus increases to +4. This bonus stacks with the
benefit provided by the Improved Initiative feat.

**Enhanced Mobility (Ex):** When wearing no armor and not using a
shield, a duelist gains an additional +4 bonus to AC against attacks of
opportunity caused when she moves out of a threatened square.

**Grace (Ex):** At 4th level, a duelist gains an additional +2
competence bonus on all Reflex saving throws. This ability functions for
a duelist only when she is wearing no armor and not using a shield.

**Precise Strike (Ex):** At 5th level, a duelist gains the ability to
strike precisely with a light or one-handed piercing weapon, gaining an
extra 1d6 damage added to her normal damage roll.

When making a precise strike, a duelist cannot attack with a weapon in
her other hand or use a shield. A duelist's precise strike only works
against living creatures with discernible anatomies. Any creature that
is immune to critical hits is not vulnerable to a precise strike, and
any item or ability that protects a creature from critical hitsalso
protects a creature from a precise strike. At 10th level, the extra
damage on a precise strike increases to +2d6.

**Acrobatic Charge (Ex):** At 6th level, a duelist gains the ability to
charge in situations where others cannot. She may charge over difficult
terrain that normally slows movement. Depending on the circumstance, she
may still need to make appropriate checks to successfully move over the
terrain.

**Elaborate Parry (Ex):** At 7th level and higher, if a duelist chooses
to fight defensively or use total defense in melee combat, she gains an
additional +1 dodge bonus to AC for each level of duelist she has.

Deflect Arrows: At 9th level, a duelist gains the benefit of the Deflect
Arrows feat when using a light or one-handed piercing weapon.

## Dwarven Defender

**Hit Die:** d12.

### Requirements {#dwarven-defender--requirements}

To qualify to become a defender, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Race:** Dwarf.

**Alignment:** Any lawful.

**Base Attack Bonus:** +7.

**Feats:** Dodge, Endurance, Toughness.

### Class Skills {#dwarven-defender--class-skills}

The defender's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Craft (Int), Listen (Wis), Sense Motive (Wis), and Spot (Wis).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- -----------
  Level      Base\      Fort\      Ref\       Will\      AC Bonus   Special
             Attack\    Save       Save       Save                  
             Bonus                                                  

  1st        +1         +2         +0         +2         +1         Defensive
                                                                    stance
                                                                    1/day

  2nd        +2         +3         +0         +3         +1         Uncanny
                                                                    dodge

  3rd        +3         +3         +1         +3         +1         Defensive
                                                                    stance
                                                                    2/day

  4th        +4         +4         +1         +4         +2         Trap sense
                                                                    +1

  5th        +5         +4         +1         +4         +2         Defensive
                                                                    stance
                                                                    3/day

  6th        +6         +5         +2         +5         +2         Damage
                                                                    reduction
                                                                    3/--,
                                                                    improved
                                                                    uncanny
                                                                    dodge

  7th        +7         +5         +2         +5         +3         Defensive
                                                                    stance
                                                                    4/day

  8th        +8         +6         +2         +6         +3         Mobile
                                                                    defense,
                                                                    trap sense
                                                                    +2

  9th        +9         +6         +3         +6         +3         Defensive
                                                                    stance
                                                                    5/day

  10th       +10        +7         +3         +7         +4         Damage
                                                                    reduction
                                                                    6/--
  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- -----------

  : Table: The Dwarven Defender

### Class Features {#dwarven-defender--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the dwarven defender prestige
class.

**AC Bonus (Ex):** The dwarven defender receives a dodge bonus to Armor
Class that starts at +1 and improves as the defender gains levels, until
it reaches +4 at 10th level.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** A dwarven defender is proficient with
all simple and martial weapons, all types of armor, and shields.

**Defensive Stance:** When he adopts a defensive stance, a defender
gains phenomenal strength and durability, but he cannot move from the
spot he is defending. He gains +2 to Strength, +4 to Constitution, a +2
resistance bonus on all saves, and a +4 dodge bonus to AC. The increase
in Constitution increases the defender's hit points by 2 points per
level, but these hit points go away at the end of the defensive stance
when the Constitution score drops back 4 points. These extra hit points
are not lost first the way temporary hit points are. While in a
defensive stance, a defender cannot use skills or abilities that would
require him to shift his position. A defensive stance lasts for a number
of rounds equal to 3 + the character's (newly improved) Constitution
modifier. A defender may end his defensive stance voluntarily prior to
this limit. At the end of the defensive stance, the defender is winded
and takes a --2 penalty to Strength for the duration of that encounter.
A defender can only use his defensive stance a certain number of times
per day as determined by his level (see Table: The Dwarven Defender).
Using the defensive stance takes no time itself, but a defender can only
do so during his action.

**Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** Starting at 2nd level, a dwarven defender
retains his Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) regardless of being caught
flat-footed or struck by an invisible attacker. (He still loses any
Dexterity bonus to AC if immobilized.)

If a character gains uncanny dodge from a second class, the character
automatically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below).

**Trap Sense (Ex):** At 4th level, a dwarven defender gains a +1 bonus
on Reflex saves made to avoid traps and a +1 dodge bonus to AC against
attacks by traps. At 8th level, these bonuses rise to +2. These bonuses
stack with trap sense bonuses gained from other classes.

**Damage Reduction (Ex):** At 6th level, a dwarven defender gains damage
reduction. Subtract 3 points from the damage the dwarven defender takes
each time he is dealt damage. At 10th level, this damage reduction rises
to 6/--. Damage reduction can reduce damage to 0 but not below 0.

**Improved Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** At 6th level, a dwarven defender can no
longer be flanked. This defense denies rogues the ability to use flank
attacks to sneak attack the dwarven defender.

The exception to this defense is that a rogue at least four levels
higher than the dwarven defender can flank him (and thus sneak attack
him).

If a character gains uncanny dodge (see above) from a second class the
character automatically gains improved uncanny dodge, and the levels
from those classes stack to determine the minimum rogue level required
to flank the character.

**Mobile Defense (Ex):** At 8th level, a dwarven defender can adjust his
position while maintaining a defensive stance. While in a defensive
stance, he can take one 5-foot step each round without losing the
benefit of the stance.

## Eldritch Knight

**Hit Die:** d6.

### Requirements {#eldritch-knight--requirements}

To qualify to become an eldritch knight, a character must fulfill all
the following criteria.

**Weapon Proficiency:** Must be proficient with all martial weapons.

**Spells:** Able to cast 3rd-level arcane spells.

### Class Skills {#eldritch-knight--class-skills}

The eldritch knight's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Jump (Str),
Knowledge (arcana) (Int), Knowledge (nobility and royalty) (Int), Ride
(Dex), Sense Motive (Wis), Spellcraft (Int), and Swim (Str).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------------
  Level       Base\       Fort\       Ref\        Will\       Special
              Attack\     Save        Save        Save        
              Bonus                                           

  1st         +1          +2          +0          +0          Bonus feat

  2nd         +2          +3          +0          +0          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  3rd         +3          +3          +1          +1          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  4th         +4          +4          +1          +1          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  5th         +5          +4          +1          +1          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  6th         +6          +5          +2          +2          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  7th         +7          +5          +2          +2          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  8th         +8          +6          +2          +2          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  9th         +9          +6          +3          +3          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class

  10th        +10         +7          +3          +3          +1 level of
                                                              existing
                                                              arcane
                                                              spellcasting
                                                              class
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- --------------

  : Table: The Eldritch Knight

### Class Features {#eldritch-knight--class-features}

All of the following are features of the eldritch knight prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Eldritch knights gain no proficiency
with any weapon or armor.

**Bonus Feat:** At 1st level, an eldritch knight may choose a bonus feat
from the list of feats available to fighters. This is in addition to the
feats that a character of any class normally gets from advancing levels.
The character must still meet any prerequisites for these bonus feats,
including levels of fighter for the Weapon Specialization, Greater
Weapon Focus, and Greater Weapon Specialization feats.

**Spells per Day:** From 2nd level on, when a new eldritch knight level
is gained, the character gains new spells per day as if she had also
gained a level in whatever arcane spellcasting class she belonged to
before she added the prestige class. She does not, however, gain any
other benefit a character of that class would have gained. This
essentially means that she adds the level of eldritch knight to the
level of whatever other arcane spellcasting class the character has,
then determines spells per day and caster level accordingly.

If a character had more than one arcane spellcasting class before she
became an eldritch knight, she must decide to which class she adds each
level of eldritch knight for the purpose of determining spells per day.

## Hierophant

**Hit Die:** d8.

### Requirements {#hierophant--requirements}

To qualify to become a hierophant, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Skills:** Knowledge (religion) 15 ranks.

**Feats:** Any metamagic feat.

**Spells:** Able to cast 7th-level divine spells.

### Class Skills {#hierophant--class-skills}

The hierophant's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Heal (Wis), Knowledge
(arcana) (Int), Knowledge (religion) (Int), Profession (Wis), and
Spellcraft (Int).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Level       Base\       Fort\       Ref\        Will\       Special
              Attack\     Save        Save        Save        
              Bonus                                           

  1st         +0          +2          +0          +2          Special
                                                              ability

  2nd         +1          +3          +0          +3          Special
                                                              ability

  3rd         +1          +3          +1          +3          Special
                                                              ability

  4th         +2          +4          +1          +4          Special
                                                              ability

  5th         +2          +4          +1          +4          Special
                                                              ability
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

  : Table: The Hierophant

### Class Features {#hierophant--class-features}

All the following are Class Features of the hierophant prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Hierophants gain no proficiency with
any weapon or armor.

**Spells and Caster Level:** Levels in the hierophant prestige class,
even though they do not advance spell progression in the character's
base class, still stack with the character's base spellcasting levels to
determine caster level.

**Special Ability:** Every level, a hierophant gains a special ability
of his choice from among the following.

*Blast Infidel (Su):* A hierophant can use negative energy spells to
their maximum effect on creatures with an alignment opposed to the
hierophant. (See the table below for a list of which alignments are
opposed to each alignment.) Any spell with a description that involves
inflicting or channeling negative energy cast on a creature of the
opposed alignment works as if under the effect of a Maximize Spell feat
(without using a higher-level spell slot). Undead affected by this
ability heal the maximized amount of damage.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  Hierophant Alignment                                                                                                               Opposed Alignment
  Lawful good                                                                                                                        Chaotic evil
  Neutral good                                                                                                                       Neutral evil
  Chaotic good                                                                                                                       Lawful evil
  Lawful neutral                                                                                                                     Chaotic neutral
  Neutral                                                                                                                            Lawful good, chaotic good, lawful evil, chaotic evil\*
  Chaotic neutral                                                                                                                    Lawful neutral
  Lawful evil                                                                                                                        Chaotic good
  Neutral evil                                                                                                                       Neutral good
  Chaotic evil                                                                                                                       Lawful good
  \* A neutral hierophant chooses one of these alignments to be the one that he opposes, for the purposes of this special ability.   
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Reach (Su):* A hierophant with this ability can use touch spells
on targets up to 30 feet away. If the spell requires a melee touch
attack, the hierophant must make a ranged touch attack instead. Divine
reach can be selected a second time as a special ability, in which case
the range increases to 60 feet.

*Faith Healing (Su):* A hierophant can use healing spells to their
maximum effect on creatures of the same alignment as the hierophant
(including the hierophant himself ). Any spell with the healing
descriptor cast on such creatures works as if under the effects of a
Maximize Spell feat (without using a higher-level spell slot).

*Gift of the Divine (Su):* Available only to hierophants with cleric
levels, this ability allows a hierophant to transfer one or more uses of
his turn undead ability to a willing creature. (Hierophants who rebuke
undead transfer uses of rebuke undead instead.) The transfer lasts
anywhere from 24 hours to one week (chosen at the time of transfer), and
while the transfer is in effect, the number of turning attempts per day
allowed to the hierophant is reduced by the number transferred. The
recipient turns undead as a cleric of the hierophant's cleric level but
uses her own Charisma modifier.

*Mastery of Energy (Su):* Available only to hierophants with cleric
levels, this ability allows a hierophant to channel positive or negative
energy much more effectively, increasing his ability to affect undead.
Add a +4 bonus to the hierophant's turning checks and turning damage
rolls. This ability only affects undead, even if the hierophant can turn
other creatures, such as with a granted power of a domain.

*Metamagic Feat:* A hierophant can choose a metamagic feat in place of
one of the special abilities described here if desired.

*Power of Nature (Su):* Available only to hierophants with druid levels,
this ability allows a hierophant to temporarily transfer one or more of
his druid Class Features to a willing creature. The transfer lasts
anywhere from 24 hours to one week (chosen at the time of transfer), and
while the transfer is in effect, the hierophant cannot use the
transferred power. He can transfer any of his druid powers except
spellcasting and the ability to have an animal companion.

The druid's wild shape ability can be partially or completely
transferred. The heirophant choses how many uses of wild shape per day
to give to transfer and retains the rest of the uses for himself. If the
hierophant can assume the form of Tiny or Huge animals, the recipient
can as well.

As with the *imbue with spell ability* spell, the hierophant remains
responsible to his deity for any use to which the recipient puts the
transferred abilities.

*Spell Power:* This special ability increases a hierophant's effective
caster level by 1 for purposes of determining level-dependent spell
variables and for caster level checks. This ability can be selected more
than once, and changes to effective caster level are cumulative.

*Spell-Like Ability:* A hierophant who selects this special ability can
use one of his divine spell slots to permanently prepare one of his
divine spells as a spell-like ability that can be used twice per day.
The hierophant does not use any components when casting the spell,
although a spell that costs XP to cast still does so, and a spell with a
costly material component instead costs him 10 times that amount in XP.

The spell normally uses a spell slot of the spell's level (or higher, if
the hierophant chooses to permanently attach a metamagic feat to the
spell chosen). The hierophant can use an available higher-level spell
slot to use the spell-like ability more than once per day. Allocating a
slot three levels higher allows him to cast the spell four times per
day, and a slot six levels higher lets him cast it six times per day. If
selected more than one time as a special ability, this ability can apply
to the same spell (increasing the number of times per day it can be
used) or to a different spell.

## Horizon Walker

**Hit Die:** d8.

### Requirements {#horizon-walker--requirements}

To qualify to become a horizon walker, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Skills:** Knowledge (geography) 8 ranks.

**Feats:** Endurance.

### Class Skills {#horizon-walker--class-skills}

The horizon walker's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Balance (Dex), Climb (Str), Diplomacy (Cha), Handle Animal (Cha),
Hide (Dex), Knowledge (geography) (Int), Listen (Wis), Move Silently
(Dex), Profession (Wis), Ride (Dex), Speak Language (none), Spot (Wis),
and Survival (Wis).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Level       Base\       Fort\       Ref\        Will\       Special
              Attack\     Save        Save        Save        
              Bonus                                           

  1st         +1          +2          +0          +0          Terrain
                                                              mastery

  2nd         +2          +3          +0          +0          Terrain
                                                              mastery

  3rd         +3          +3          +1          +1          Terrain
                                                              mastery

  4th         +4          +4          +1          +1          Terrain
                                                              mastery

  5th         +5          +4          +1          +1          Terrain
                                                              mastery

  6th         +6          +5          +2          +2          Planar
                                                              terrain
                                                              mastery

  7th         +7          +5          +2          +2          Planar
                                                              terrain
                                                              mastery

  8th         +8          +6          +2          +2          Planar
                                                              terrain
                                                              mastery

  9th         +9          +6          +3          +3          Planar
                                                              terrain
                                                              mastery

  10th        +10         +7          +3          +3          Planar
                                                              terrain
                                                              mastery
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

  : Table: The Horizon Walker

### Class Features {#horizon-walker--class-features}

All of the following are features of the horizon walker prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Horizon walkers gain no proficiency
with any weapon or armor.

**Terrain Mastery:** At each level, the Horizon Walker adds a new
terrain environment to their repertoire from those given below. Terrain
mastery gives a horizon walker a bonus on checks involving a skill
useful in that terrain, or some other appropriate benefit. A horizon
walker also knows how to fight dangerous creatures typically found in
that terrain, gaining a +1 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage
rolls against creatures with that terrain mentioned in the Environment
entry of their descriptions. The horizon walker only gains the bonus if
the creature description specifically lists the terrain type.

Horizon walkers take their terrain mastery with them wherever they go.
They retain their terrain mastery bonuses on skill checks, attack rolls,
and damage rolls whether they're actually in the relevant terrain or
not.

**Planar Terrain Mastery:** Planar terrain mastery functions just like
terrain mastery, except that the horizon walker can choose one of the
planar categories at each level. The horizon walker can take a
non-planar terrain type instead, if she wishes.

### Terrain Mastery Benefits

**Aquatic:** You gain a +4 competence bonus on Swim checks, or a
+10-foot bonus to your swim speed if you have one. You gain a +1 insight
bonus on attack and damage rolls against aquatic creatures.

**Desert:** You resist effects that tire you. You are immune to fatigue,
and anything that would cause you to become exhausted makes you fatigued
instead. You gain a +1 insight bonus on attack and damage rolls against
desert creatures.

**Forest:** You have a +4 competence bonus on Hide checks. You gain a +1
insight bonus on attack and damage rolls against forest creatures.

**Hills:** You gain a +4 competence bonus on Listen checks. You gain a
+1 insight bonus on attack and damage rolls against hills creatures.

**Marsh:** You have a +4 competence bonus on Move Silently checks. You
gain a +1 insight bonus on attack and damage rolls against marsh
creatures.

**Mountains:** You gain a +4 competence bonus on Climb checks, or a +10-
foot bonus to your climb speed if you have one. You gain a +1 insight
bonus on attack and damage rolls against mountain creatures.

**Plains:** You have a +4 competence bonus on Spot checks. You gain a +1
insight bonus on attack and damage rolls against plains creatures.

**Underground:** You have 60-foot darkvision, or 120-foot darkvision if
you already had darkvision from another source. You gain a +1 insight
bonus on attack and damage rolls against underground creatures.

**Fiery (Planar):** This kind of planar terrain mastery provides you
with resistance to fire 20. You gain a +1 insight bonus on attack and
damage rolls against outsiders and elementals with the fire subtype.

**Weightless (Planar):** You gain a +30-foot bonus to your fly speed on
planes with no gravity or subjective gravity. You gain a +1 insight on
attack and damage rolls against creatures native to the Astral Plane,
the Elemental Plane of Air, and the Ethereal Plane.

**Cold (Planar):** This kind of planar terrain mastery provides you with
resistance to cold 20. You gain a +1 insight bonus on attack and damage
rolls against outsiders and elementals with the cold subtype.

**Shifting (Planar):** You instinctively anticipate shifts in the
reality of the plane that bring you closer to your destination, giving
you the spell-like ability to use *dimension door* (as the spell cast at
your character level) once every 1d4 rounds. You gain a +1 insight bonus
on attack and damage rolls against outsiders and elementals native to a
shifting plane.

**Aligned (Planar):** You have the instinctive ability to mimic the
dominant alignment of the plane. You incur none of the penalties for
having an alignment at odds with that of the plane, and spells and
abilities that harm those of the opposite alignment don't affect you.
You have the dominant alignment of the plane with regard to magic, but
your behavior and any alignment-related Class Features you have are
unaffected.

**Cavernous (Planar):** You gain tremorsense with a 30-foot range.

**Other (Planar):** If other planes are in use additional Planar
Terrains can be created.

## Loremaster

**Hit Die:** d4.

### Requirements {#loremaster--requirements}

To qualify to become a loremaster, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Skills:** Knowledge (any two) 10 ranks in each.

**Feats:** Any three metamagic or item creation feats, plus Skill Focus
(Knowledge \[any individual Knowledge skill\]).

**Spells:** Able to cast seven different divination spells, one of which
must be 3rd level or higher.

### Class Skills {#loremaster--class-skills}

The loremaster's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Appraise (Int), Concentration (Con), Craft (alchemy) (Int), Decipher
Script (Int), Gather Information (Cha), Handle Animals (Cha), Heal
(Wis), Knowledge (all skills taken individually) (Int), Perform (Cha),
Profession (Wis), Speak Language, Spellcraft (Int), and Use Magic Device
(Cha).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

  ------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------
  Table : The                                                         
  Loremaster                                                          

  Level        Base\      Fort\      Ref\       Will\      Special    Spells per
               Attack\    Save       Save       Save                  Day
               Bonus                                                  

  1st          +0         +0         +0         +2         Secret     +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  2nd          +1         +0         +0         +3         Lore       +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  3rd          +1         +1         +1         +3         Secret     +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  4th          +2         +1         +1         +4         Bonus      +1 level
                                                           language   of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  5th          +2         +1         +1         +4         Secret     +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  6th          +3         +2         +2         +5         Greater    +1 level
                                                           lore       of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  7th          +3         +2         +2         +5         Secret     +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  8th          +4         +2         +2         +6         Bonus      +1 level
                                                           language   of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  9th          +4         +3         +3         +6         Secret     +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class

  10th         +5         +3         +3         +7         True lore  +1 level
                                                                      of
                                                                      existing
                                                                      class
  ------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------

### Class Features {#loremaster--class-features}

All of the following are Class Features of the loremaster prestige
class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Loremasters gain no proficiency with
any weapon or armor.

**Spells per Day/Spells Known:** When a new loremaster level is gained,
the character gains new spells per day (and spells known, if applicable)
as if she had also gained a level in a spellcasting class she belonged
to before she added the prestige class. She does not, however, gain any
other benefit a character of that class would have gained. This
essentially means that she adds the level of loremaster to the level of
some other spellcasting class the character has, then determines spells
per day, spells known, and caster level accordingly.

**Secret:** At 1st level and every two levels higher than 1st (3rd, 5th,
7th, and 9th), the loremaster chooses one

secret from the table below. Her level plus Intelligence modifier
determines the total number of secrets she can choose. She can't choose
the same secret twice.

**Lore:** At 2nd level, a loremaster gains the ability to know legends
or information regarding various topics, just as a bard can with bardic
knowledge. The loremaster adds her level and her Intelligence modifier
to the lore check, which functions otherwise exactly like a bardic
knowledge check.

**Bonus Languages:** A loremaster can choose any new language at 4th and
8th level.

**Greater Lore (Ex):** At 6th level, a loremaster gains the ability to
understand magic items, as with the *identify* spell.

**True Lore (Ex):** At 10th level, once per day a loremaster can use her
knowledge to gain the effect of a *legend lore* spell or an *analyze
dweomer* spell.

  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  Loremaster Secrets                              

  Level +\                Secret                  Effect
  Int Modifier                                    

  1                       Instant mastery         4 ranks of a skill in
                                                  which the character has
                                                  no ranks

  2                       Secret health           +3 hit points

  3                       Secrets of inner        +2 bonus on Will saves
                          strength                

  4                       The lore of true        +2 bonus on Fortitude
                          stamina                 saves

  5                       Secret knowledge of     +2 bonus on Reflex
                          avoidance               saves

  6                       Weapon trick            +1 bonus on attack
                                                  rolls

  7                       Dodge trick             +1 dodge bonus to AC

  8                       Applicable knowledge    Any one feat

  9                       Newfound arcana         1 bonus 1st-level
                                                  spell\*

  10                      More newfound arcana    1 bonus 2nd-level
                                                  spell\*

  \* As if gained through                         
  having a high ability                           
  score.                                          
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------

## Mystic Theurge

**Hit Die:** d4.

### Requirements {#mystic-theurge--requirements}

To qualify to become a mystic theurge, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Skills:** Knowledge (arcana) 6 ranks, Knowledge (religion) 6 ranks.

**Spells:** Able to cast 2nd-level divine spells and 2nd-level arcane
spells.

### Class Skills {#mystic-theurge--class-skills}

The mystic theurge's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Decipher Script (Int), Knowledge
(arcana) (Int), Knowledge (religion) (Int), Profession (Wis), Sense
Motive (Wis), and Spellcraft (Int).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| Level     | Base\     | Fort\     | Ref\      | Will\     | Spells    |
|           | Attack\   | Save      | Save      | Save      | per Day   |
|           | Bonus     |           |           |           |           |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 1st       | +0        | +0        | +0        | +2        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 2nd       | +1        | +0        | +0        | +3        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 3rd       | +1        | +1        | +1        | +3        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 4th       | +2        | +1        | +1        | +4        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 5th       | +2        | +1        | +1        | +4        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 6th       | +3        | +2        | +2        | +5        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 7th       | +3        | +2        | +2        | +5        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8th       | +4        | +2        | +2        | +6        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 9th       | +4        | +3        | +3        | +6        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 10th      | +5        | +3        | +3        | +7        | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | arcane    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class/    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | <div>     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | +1 level  |
|           |           |           |           |           | of        |
|           |           |           |           |           | existing  |
|           |           |           |           |           | divine    |
|           |           |           |           |           | spe       |
|           |           |           |           |           | llcasting |
|           |           |           |           |           | class     |
|           |           |           |           |           |           |
|           |           |           |           |           | </div>    |
+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

: Table: The Mystic Theurge

### Class Features {#mystic-theurge--class-features}

All of the following are features of the mystic theurge prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Mystic theurges gain no proficiency
with any weapon or armor.

**Spells per Day:** When a new mystic theurge level is gained, the
character gains new spells per day as if he had also gained a level in
any one arcane spellcasting class he belonged to before he added the
prestige class and any one divine spellcasting class he belonged to
previously. He does not, however, gain any other benefit a character of
that class would have gained. This essentially means that he adds the
level of mystic theurge to the level of whatever other arcane
spellcasting class and divine spellcasting class the character has, then
determines spells per day and caster level accordingly. If a character
had more than one arcane spellcasting class or more than one divine
spellcasting class before he became a mystic theurge, he must decide to
which class he adds each level of mystic theurge for the purpose of
determining spells per day.

## Shadowdancer

**Hit Die:** d8.

### Requirements {#shadowdancer--requirements}

To qualify to become a shadowdancer, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Skills:** Move Silently 8 ranks, Hide 10 ranks, Perform (dance) 5
ranks.

**Feats:** Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility.

### Class Skills {#shadowdancer--class-skills}

The shadowdancer's class skills (and the key ability for each skill) are
Balance (Dex), Bluff (Cha), Decipher Script (Int), Diplomacy (Cha),
Disguise (Cha), Escape Artist (Dex), Hide (Dex), Jump (Str), Listen
(Wis), Move Silently (Dex), Perform (Cha), Profession (Wis), Search
(Int), Sleight of Hand (Dex), Spot (Wis), Tumble (Dex), and Use Rope
(Dex).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 6 + Int modifier.

  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -------------
  Level       Base\       Fort\       Ref\        Will\       Special
              Attack\     Save        Save        Save        
              Bonus                                           

  1st         +0          +0          +2          +0          Hide in plain
                                                              sight

  2nd         +1          +0          +3          +0          Evasion,
                                                              darkvision,
                                                              uncanny dodge

  3rd         +2          +1          +3          +1          *Shadow
                                                              illusion*,
                                                              summon shadow

  4th         +3          +1          +4          +1          Shadow jump
                                                              20 ft.

  5th         +3          +1          +4          +1          Defensive
                                                              roll,
                                                              improved
                                                              uncanny dodge

  6th         +4          +2          +5          +2          Shadow jump
                                                              40 ft.,
                                                              summon shadow

  7th         +5          +2          +5          +2          Slippery mind

  8th         +6          +2          +6          +2          Shadow jump
                                                              80 ft.

  9th         +6          +3          +6          +3          Summon shadow

  10th        +7          +3          +7          +3          Shadow jump
                                                              160 ft.,
                                                              improved
                                                              evasion
  ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -------------

  : Table: The Shadowdancer

### Class Features {#shadowdancer--class-features}

All of the following are features of the shadowdancer prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Shadowdancers are proficient with the
club, crossbow (hand, light, or heavy), dagger (any type), dart, mace,
morningstar, quarterstaff, rapier, sap, shortbow (normal and composite),
and short sword. Shadowdancers are proficient with light armor but not
with shields.

**Hide in Plain Sight (Su):** A shadowdancer can use the Hide skill even
while being observed. As long as she is within 10 feet of some sort of
shadow, a shadowdancer can hide herself from view in the open without
anything to actually hide behind. She cannot, however, hide in her own
shadow.

**Evasion (Ex):** At 2nd level, a shadowdancer gains evasion. If exposed
to any effect that normally allows her to attempt a Reflex saving throw
for half damage, she takes no damage with a successful saving throw. The
evasion ability can only be used if the shadowdancer is wearing light
armor or no armor.

**Darkvision (Su):** At 2nd level, a shadowdancer can see in the dark as
though she were permanently under the effect of a *darkvision* spell.

**Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** Starting at 2nd level, a shadowdancer retains
her Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) regardless of being caught
flat-footed or struck by an invisible attacker. (She still loses any
Dexterity bonus to AC if immobilized.)

If a character gains uncanny dodge from a second class, the character
automatically gains improved uncanny dodge (see below).

***Shadow Illusion* (Sp):** When a shadowdancer reaches 3rd level, she
can create visual illusions. This ability's effect is identical to that
of the arcane spell *silent image* and may be employed once per day.

**Summon Shadow (Su):** At 3rd level, a shadowdancer can summon a
shadow, an undead shade. Unlike a normal shadow, this shadow's alignment
matches that of the shadowdancer, and the creature cannot create spawn.
The summoned shadow cannot be turned, rebuked, or commanded by any third
party. This shadow serves as a companion to the shadowdancer and can
communicate intelligibly with the shadowdancer. Every third level gained
by the shadowdancer adds +2 HD (and the requisite base attack and base
save bonus increases) to her shadow companion.

If a shadow companion is destroyed, or the shadowdancer chooses to
dismiss it, the shadowdancer must attempt a DC 15 Fortitude save. If the
saving throw fails, the shadowdancer loses 200 experience points per
shadowdancer level. A successful saving throw reduces the loss by half,
to 100 XP per prestige class level. The shadowdancer's XP total can
never go below 0 as the result of a shadow's dismissal or destruction. A
destroyed or dismissed shadow companion cannot be replaced for 30 days.

**Shadow Jump (Su):** At 4th level, a shadowdancer gains the ability to
travel between shadows as if by means of a *dimension door* spell. The
limitation is that the magical transport must begin and end in an area
with at least some shadow. A shadowdancer can jump up to a total of 20
feet each day in this way; this may be a single jump of 20 feet or two
jumps of 10 feet each. Every two levels higher than 4th, the distance a
shadowdancer can jump each day doubles (40 feet at 6th, 80 feet at 8th,
and 160 feet at 10th). This amount can be split among many jumps, but
each one, no matter how small, counts as a 10-foot increment.

**Defensive Roll (Ex):** Starting at 5th level, once per day, when a
shadowdancer would be reduced to 0 hit points or less by damage in
combat (from a weapon or other blow, not a spell or special ability),
she can attempt to roll with the damage. She makes a Reflex saving throw
(DC = damage dealt) and, if successful, takes only half damage from the
blow. She must be aware of the attack and able to react to it in order
to execute her defensive roll. If she is in a situation that would deny
her any Dexterity bonus to AC, she can't attempt a defensive roll.

**Improved Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** At 5th level, a shadowdancer can no
longer be flanked. This defense denies rogues the ability to use flank
attacks to sneak attack the shadowdancer. The exception to this defense
is that a rogue at least four levels higher than the shadowdancer can
flank her (and thus sneak attack her).

If a character gains uncanny dodge (see above) from a second class the
character automatically gains improved uncanny dodge, and the levels
from those classes stack to determine the minimum rogue level required
to flank the character.

**Slippery Mind (Ex):** At 7th level, if a shadowdancer is affected by
an enchantment and fails her saving throw, 1 round later she can attempt
her saving throw again. She only gets this one extra chance to succeed
at her saving throw. If it fails as well, the spell's effects occur
normally.

**Improved Evasion (Ex):** This ability, gained at 10th level, works
like evasion (see above). A shadowdancer takes no damage at all on
successful saving throws against attacks that allow a Reflex saving
throw for half damage. What's more, she takes only half damage even if
she fails her saving throw.

## Thaumaturgist

**Hit Die:** d4.

### Requirements {#thaumaturgist--requirements}

To qualify to become a thaumaturgist, a character must fulfill all the
following criteria.

**Feats:** Spell Focus (conjuration).

**Spells:** Able to cast *lesser planar ally*.

### Class Skills {#thaumaturgist--class-skills}

The thaumaturgist's class skills (and the key ability for each skill)
are Concentration (Con), Craft (Int), Diplomacy (Cha), Knowledge
(religion) (Int), Knowledge (the planes) (Int), Profession (Wis), Sense
Motive (Wis), Speak Language (none), and Spellcraft (Int).

**Skill Points at Each Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ------------- --------------
  Level      Base\      Fort\      Ref\       Will\      Special       Spells per Day
             Attack\    Save       Save       Save                     
             Bonus                                                     

  1st        +0         +0         +0         +2         Improved ally +1 level of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       spellcasting
                                                                       class

  2nd        +1         +0         +0         +3         Augment       +1 level of
                                                         Summoning     existing
                                                                       spellcasting
                                                                       class

  3rd        +1         +1         +1         +3         Extended      +1 level of
                                                         summoning     existing
                                                                       spellcasting
                                                                       class

  4th        +2         +1         +1         +4         Contingent    +1 level of
                                                         conjuration   existing
                                                                       spellcasting
                                                                       class

  5th        +2         +1         +1         +4         Planar cohort +1 level of
                                                                       existing
                                                                       spellcasting
                                                                       class
  ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ------------- --------------

  : Table: The Thaumaturgist

### Class Features {#thaumaturgist--class-features}

All of the following are features of the thaumaturgist prestige class.

**Weapon and Armor Proficiency:** Thaumaturgists gain no proficiency
with any weapon or armor.

**Spells per Day:** When a new thaumaturgist level is gained, the
character gains new spells per day as if he had also gained a level in
whatever spellcasting class he belonged to before he added the prestige
class. He does not, however, gain any other benefit a character of that
class would have gained. This essentially means that he adds the level
of thaumaturgist to the level of whatever other spellcasting class the
character has, then determines spells per day and caster level
accordingly.

If a character had more than one spellcasting class before he became a
thaumaturgist, he must decide to which class he adds each level of
thaumaturgist for the purpose of determining spells per day.

**Improved Ally:** When a thaumaturgist casts a *planar ally* spell
(including the *lesser* and *greater* versions), he makes a Diplomacy
check to convince the creature to aid him for a reduced payment. If the
thaumaturgist's Diplomacy check adjusts the creature's attitude to
helpful the creature will work for 50% of the standard fee, as long as
the task is one that is not against its nature.

The thaumaturgist's improved ally class feature only works when the
planar ally shares at least one aspect of alignment with the
thaumaturgist.

A thaumaturgist can have only one such ally at a time, but he may
bargain for tasks from other planar allies normally.

**Augment Summoning:** At 2nd level, a thaumaturgist gains the Augment
Summoning feat.

**Extended Summoning:** At 3rd level and higher, all spells from the
summoning subschool that the thaumaturgist casts have their durations
doubled, as if the Extend Spell feat had been applied to them. The
levels of the summoning spells don't change, however. This ability
stacks with the effect of the Extend Spell feat, which does change the
spell's level.

**Contingent Conjuration:** A 4th-level thaumaturgist can prepare a
summoning or calling spell ahead of time to be triggered by some other
event. This functions as described for the *contingency* spell,
including having the thaumaturgist cast the summoning or calling spell
beforehand. The spell is cast instantly when the trigger event occurs.

The conditions needed to bring the spell into effect must be clear,
although they can be general. If complicated or convoluted condition as
are prescribed, the contingent conjuration may fail when triggered. The
conjuration spell occurs based solely on the stated conditions,
regardless of whether the thaumaturgist wants it to, although most
conjurations can be dismissed normally. A thaumaturgist can have only
one contingent conjuration active at a time.

**Planar Cohort:** A 5th-level thaumaturgist can use any of the *planar
ally* spells to call a creature to act as his cohort. The called
creature serves loyally and well as long as the thaumaturgist continues
to advance a cause important to the creature.

To call a planar cohort, the thaumaturgist must cast the relevant spell,
paying the XP costs normally. It takes an offering of 1,000 gp x the HD
of the creature to convince it to serve as a planar cohort, and the
improved ally class feature can't be used to reduce or eliminate this
cost. The planar cohort can't have more Hit Dice than the thaumaturgist
has, and must have an ECL no higher than the thaumaturgist's character
level --2.

A thaumaturgist can have only one planar cohort at a time, but he can
continue to make agreements with other called creatures normally. A
planar cohort replaces a thaumaturgist's existing cohort, if he has one
by virtue of the Leadership feat.
