---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Basic Rules and Legal / Traps
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# TRAPS

**Types of Traps:** A trap can be either mechanical or magic in nature.
Mechanical traps include pits, arrow traps, falling blocks, water-filled
rooms, whirling blades, and anything else that depends on a mechanism to
operate. A mechanical trap can be constructed by a PC through successful
use of the Craft (trapmaking) skill (see Designing a Trap, below, and
the skill description).

Magic traps are further divided into spell traps and magic device traps.
Magic device traps initiate spell effects when activated, just as wands,
rods, rings, and other magic items do. Creating a magic device trap
requires the Craft Wondrous Item feat (see Designing a Trap and the feat
description).

Spell traps are simply spells that themselves function as traps.
Creating a spell trap requires the services of a character who can cast
the needed spell or spells, who is usually either the character creating
the trap or an NPC spellcaster hired for the purpose.

## Table of Contents

-   [Mechanical Traps](#mechanical-traps)
-   [Magic Traps](#magic-traps)
-   [Elements of a Trap](#elements-of-a-trap)
    -   [Trigger](#trigger)
    -   [Reset](#reset)
    -   [Repairing and Resetting Mechanical
        Traps](#repairing-and-resetting-mechanical-traps)
    -   [Bypass (Optional Element)](#bypass)
    -   [Search and Disable Device Dcs](#search-and-disable-device-dcs)
    -   [Attack Bonus/Saving Throw Dc](#attack-bonus-saving-throw-dc)
    -   [Damage/Effect](#damage-effect)
    -   [Miscellaneous Trap Features](#miscellaneous-trap-features)
-   [Sample Traps](#sample-traps)
    -   [Cr 1 Traps](#cr-1-traps)
    -   [Cr 2 Traps](#cr-2-traps)
    -   [Cr 3 Traps](#cr-3-traps)
    -   [Cr 4 Traps](#cr-4-traps)
    -   [Cr 5 Traps](#cr-5-traps)
    -   [Cr 6 Traps](#cr-6-traps)
    -   [Cr 7 Traps](#cr-7-traps)
    -   [Cr 8 Traps](#cr-8-traps)
    -   [Cr 9 Traps](#cr-9-traps)
    -   [Cr 10 Traps](#cr-10-traps)
-   [Designing a Trap](#designing-a-trap)
    -   [Challenge Rating of a Trap](#challenge-rating-of-a-trap)
    -   [Mechanical Trap Cost](#mechanical-trap-cost)
    -   [Magic Device Trap Cost](#magic-device-trap-cost)
    -   [Spell Trap Cost](#spell-trap-cost)
    -   [Craft Dcs for Mechanical
        Traps](#craft-dcs-for-mechanical-traps)

## Mechanical Traps

Dungeons are frequently equipped with deadly mechanical (nonmagical)
traps. A trap typically is defined by its location and triggering
conditions, how hard it is to spot before it goes off, how much damage
it deals, and whether or not the heroes receive a saving throw to
mitigate its effects. Traps that attack with arrows, sweeping blades,
and other types of weaponry make normal attack rolls, with a specific
attack bonus dictated by the trap's design.

Creatures who succeed on a DC 20 Search check detect a simple mechanical
trap before it is triggered. (A simple trap is a snare, a trap triggered
by a tripwire, or a large trap such as a pit.)

A character with the trap sense class feature who succeeds on a DC 21
(or higher) Search check detects a well-hidden or complex mechanical
trap before it is triggered. Complex traps are denoted by their
triggering mechanisms and involve pressure plates, mechanisms linked to
doors, changes in weight, disturbances in the air, vibrations, and other
sorts of unusual triggers.

## Magic Traps

Many spells can be used to create dangerous traps. Unless the spell or
item description states otherwise, assume the following to be true.

-   A successful Search check (DC 25 + spell level) made by a rogue (and
    only a rogue) detects a magic trap before it goes off. Other
    characters have no chance to find a magic trap with a Search check.
-   Magic traps permit a saving throw in order to avoid the effect (DC
    10 + spell level x 1.5).
-   Magic traps may be disarmed by a rogue (and only a rogue) with a
    successful Disable Device check (DC 25 + spell level).

## Elements of a Trap

All traps---mechanical or magic---have the following elements: trigger,
reset, Search DC, Disable Device DC, attack bonus (or saving throw or
onset delay), damage/effect, and Challenge Rating. Some traps may also
include optional elements, such as poison or a bypass. These
characteristics are described below.

### Trigger

A trap's trigger determines how it is sprung.

**Location:** A location trigger springs a trap when someone stands in a
particular square.

**Proximity:** This trigger activates the trap when a creature
approaches within a certain distance of it. A proximity trigger differs
from a location trigger in that the creature need not be standing in a
particular square. Creatures that are flying can spring a trap with a
proximity trigger but not one with a location trigger. Mechanical
proximity triggers are extremely sensitive to the slightest change in
the air. This makes them useful only in places such as crypts, where the
air is unusually still.

The proximity trigger used most often for magic device traps is the
*alarm* spell. Unlike when the spell is cast, an *alarm* spell used as a
trigger can have an area that's no larger than the area the trap is
meant to protect.

Some magic device traps have special proximity triggers that activate
only when certain kinds of creatures approach. For example, a *detect
good* spell can serve as a proximity trigger on an evil altar, springing
the attached trap only when someone of good alignment gets close enough
to it.

**Sound:** This trigger springs a magic trap when it detects any sound.
A sound trigger functions like an ear and has a +15 bonus on Listen
checks. A successful Move Silently check, magical *silence,* and other
effects that would negate hearing defeat it. A trap with a sound trigger
requires the casting of *clairaudience* during its construction.

**Visual:** This trigger for magic traps works like an actual eye,
springing the trap whenever it "sees" something. A trap with a visual
trigger requires the casting of *arcane eye, clairvoyance,* or *true
seeing* during its construction. Sight range and the Spot bonus
conferred on the trap depend on the spell chosen, as shown.

  -------------- --------------------------------- ------------
  Spell          Sight Range                       Spot Bonus
  arcane eye     Line of sight (unlimited range)   +20
  clairvoyance   One preselected location          +15
  true seeing    Line of sight (up to 120 ft.)     +30
  -------------- --------------------------------- ------------

If you want the trap to "see" in the dark, you must either choose the
*true seeing* option or add *darkvision* to the trap as well.
(*Darkvision* limits the trap's sight range in the dark to 60 feet.) If
invisibility, disguises, or illusions can fool the spell being used,
they can fool the visual trigger as well.

**Touch:** A touch trigger, which springs the trap when touched, is one
of the simplest kinds of trigger to construct. This trigger may be
physically attached to the part of the mechanism that deals the damage
or it may not. You can make a magic touch trigger by adding *alarm* to
the trap and reducing the area of the effect to cover only the trigger
spot.

**Timed:** This trigger periodically springs the trap after a certain
duration has passed.

**Spell:** All spell traps have this kind of trigger. The appropriate
spell descriptionsexplain the trigger conditions for traps that contain
spell triggers.

### Reset

A reset element is the set of conditions under which a trap becomes
ready to trigger again.

**No Reset:** Short of completely rebuilding the trap, there's no way to
trigger it more than once. Spell traps have no reset element.

**Repair:** To get the trap functioning again, you must repair it.

**Manual:** Resetting the trap requires someone to move the parts back
into place. This is the kind of reset element most mechanical traps
have.

**Automatic:** The trap resets itself, either immediately or after a
timed interval.

### Repairing and Resetting Mechanical Traps

Repairing a mechanical trap requires a Craft (trapmaking) check against
a DC equal to the one for building it. The cost for raw materials is
one-fifth of the trap's original market price. To calculate how long it
takes to fix a trap, use the same calculations you would for building
it, but use the cost of the raw materials required for repair in place
of the market price.

Resetting a trap usually takes only a minute or so. For a trap with a
more difficult reset method, you should set the time and labor required.

### Bypass (Optional Element) {#bypass}

If the builder of a trap wants to be able to move past the trap after it
is created or placed, it's a good idea to build in a bypass mechanism
---something that temporarily disarms the trap. Bypass elements are
typically used only with mechanical traps; spell traps usually have
built-in allowances for the caster to bypass them.

**Lock:** A lock bypass requires a DC 30 Open Lock check to open.

**Hidden Switch:** A hidden switch requires a DC 25 Search check to
locate.

**Hidden Lock:** A hidden lock combines the features above, requiring a
DC 25 Search check to locate and a DC 30 Open Lock check to open.

### Search and Disable Device Dcs

The builder sets the Search and Disable Device DCs for a mechanical
trap. For a magic trap, the values depend on the highest-level spell
used.

**Mechanical Trap:** The base DC for both Search and Disable Device
checks is 20. Raising or lowering either of these DCs affects the base
cost (Table: Cost Modifiers for Mechanical Traps) and possibly the CR
(Table: CR Modifiers for Mechanical Traps).

**Magic Trap:** The DC for both Search and Disable Device checks is
equal to 25 + the spell level of the highest-level spell used. Only
characters with the trap sense class feature can attempt a Search check
or a Disable Device check involving a magic trap. These DCs do not
affect the trap's cost or CR.

### Attack Bonus/Saving Throw Dc {#attack-bonus-saving-throw-dc}

A trap usually either makes an attack roll or forces a saving throw to
avoid it. Occasionally a trap uses both of these options, or neither
(see Never Miss).

**Pits:** These are holes (covered or not) that characters can fall into
and take damage. A pit needs no attack roll, but a successful Reflex
save (DC set by the builder) avoids it. Other save-dependent mechanical
traps also fall into this category.

Pits in dungeons come in three basic varieties: uncovered, covered, and
chasms. Pits and chasms can be defeated by judicious application of the
Climb skill, the Jump skill, or various magical means.

Uncovered pits serve mainly to discourage intruders from going a certain
way, although they cause much grief to characters who stumble into them
in the dark, and they can greatly complicate a melee taking place
nearby.

Covered pits are much more dangerous. They can be detected with a DC 20
Search check, but only if the character is taking the time to carefully
examine the area before walking across it. A character who fails to
detect a covered pit is still entitled to a DC 20 Reflex save to avoid
falling into it. However, if she was running or moving recklessly at the
time, she gets no saving throw and falls automatically.

Trap coverings can be as simple as piled refuse (straw, leaves, sticks,
garbage), a large rug, or an actual trapdoor concealed to appear as a
normal part of the floor. Such a trapdoor usually swings open when
enough weight (usually about 50 to 80 pounds) is placed upon it. Devious
trap builders sometimes design trapdoors so that they spring back shut
after they open. The trapdoor might lock once it's back in place,
leaving the stranded character well and truly trapped. Opening such a
trapdoor is just as difficult as opening a regular door (assuming the
trapped character can reach it), and a DC 13 Strength check is needed to
keep a spring-loaded door open.

Pit traps often have something nastier than just a hard floor at the
bottom. A trap designer may put spikes, monsters, or a pool of acid,
lava, or even water at the bottom. Spikes at the bottom of a pit deal
damage as daggers with a +10 attack bonus and a +1 bonus on damage for
every 10 feet of the fall (to a maximum bonus on damage of +5). If the
pit has multiple spikes, a falling victim is attacked by 1d4 of them.
This damage is in addition to any damage from the fall itself.

Monsters sometimes live in pits. Any monster that can fit into the pit
might have been placed there by the dungeon's designer, or might simply
have fallen in and not been able to climb back out.

A secondary trap, mechanical or magical, at the bottom of a pit can be
particularly deadly. Activated by a falling victim, the secondary trap
attacks the already injured character when she's least ready for it.

**Ranged Attack Traps:** These traps fling darts, arrows, spears, or the
like at whoever activated the trap. The builder sets the attack bonus. A
ranged attack trap can be configured to simulate the effect of a
composite bow with a high strength rating which provides the trap with a
bonus on damage equal to its strength rating.

**Melee Attack Traps:** These traps feature such obstacles as sharp
blades that emerge from walls and stone blocks that fall from ceilings.
Once again, the builder sets the attack bonus.

### Damage/Effect {#damage-effect}

The effect of a trap is what happens to those who spring it. Usually
this takes the form of either damage or a spell effect, but some traps
have special effects.

**Pits:** Falling into a pit deals 1d6 points of damage per 10 feet of
depth.

**Ranged Attack Traps:** These traps deal whatever damage their
ammunition normally would. If a trap is constructed with a high strength
rating, it has a corresponding bonus on damage.

**Melee Attack Traps:** These traps deal the same damage as the melee
weapons they "wield." In the case of a falling stone block, you can
assign any amount of bludgeoning damage you like, but remember that
whoever resets the trap has to lift that stone back into place.

A melee attack trap can be constructed with a built-in bonus on damage
rolls, just as if the trap itself had a high Strength score.

**Spell Traps:** Spell traps produce the spell's effect. Like all
spells, a spell trap that allows a saving throw has a save DC of 10 +
spell level + caster's relevant ability modifier.

**Magic Device Traps:** These traps produce the effects of any spells
included in their construction, as described in the appropriate entries.
If the spell in a magic device trap allows a saving throw, its save DC
is 10 + spell level x 1.5. Some spells make attack rolls instead.

**Special:** Some traps have miscellaneous features that produce special
effects, such as drowning for a water trap or ability damage for poison.
Saving throws and damage depend on the poison or are set by the builder,
as appropriate.

### Miscellaneous Trap Features

Some traps include optional features that can make them considerably
more deadly. The most common such features are discussed below.

**Alchemical Item:** Mechanical traps may incorporate alchemical devices
or other special substances or items, such as tanglefoot bags,
alchemist's fire, thunderstones, and the like. Some such items mimic
spell effects. If the item mimics a spell effect, it increases the CR as
shown on Table: CR Modifiers for Mechanical Traps.

**Gas:** With a gas trap, the danger is in the inhaled poison it
delivers. Traps employing gas usually have the never miss and onset
delay features (see below).

**Liquid:** Any trap that involves a danger of drowning is in this
category. Traps employing liquid usually have the never miss and onset
delay features (see below).

**Multiple Target:** Traps with this feature can affect more than one
character.

**Never Miss:** When the entire dungeon wall moves to crush you, your
quick reflexes won't help, since the wall can't possibly miss. A trap
with this feature has neither an attack bonus nor a saving throw to
avoid, but it does have an onset delay (see below). Most traps involving
liquid or gas are of the never miss variety.

**Onset Delay:** An onset delay is the amount of time between when the
trap is sprung and when it deals damage. A never miss trap always has an
onset delay.

**Poison:** Traps that employ poison are deadlier than their
nonpoisonous counterparts, so they have correspondingly higher CRs. To
determine the CR modifier for a given poison, consult Table: CR
Modifiers for Mechanical Traps. Only injury, contact, and inhaled
poisons are suitable for traps; ingested types are not. Some traps
simply deal the poison's damage. Others deal damage with ranged or melee
attacks as well.

**Pit Spikes:** Treat spikes at the bottom of a pit as daggers, each
with a +10 attack bonus. The damage bonus for each spike is +1 per 10
feet of pit depth (to a maximum of +5). Each character who falls into
the pit is attacked by 1d4 spikes. Pit spikes do not add to the average
damage of the trap (see Average Damage, below).

**Pit Bottom:** If something other than spikes waits at the bottom of a
pit, it's best to treat that as a separate trap (see Multiple Traps,
below) with a location trigger that activates on any significant impact,
such as a falling character.

**Touch Attack:** This feature applies to any trap that needs only a
successful touch attack (melee or ranged) to hit.

## Sample Traps

The costs listed for mechanical traps are market prices; those for magic
traps are raw material costs. Caster level and class for the spells used
to produce the trap effects are provided in the entries for magic device
traps and spell traps. For all other spells used (in triggers, for
example), the caster level is assumed to be the minimum required.

### Cr 1 Traps

**Basic Arrow Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; proximity trigger; manual reset;
Atk +10 ranged (1d6/x3, arrow); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 20.
*Market Price:* 2,000 gp.

**Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 10 ft. deep (1d6, fall); Search DC 24;
Disable Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 1,800 gp.

**Deeper Pit Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
hidden switch bypass (Search DC 25); DC 15 Reflex save avoids; 20 ft.
deep (2d6, fall); multiple targets (first target in each of two adjacent
5-ft. squares); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 23. *Market Price:*
1,300 gp.

**Fusillade of Darts:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; Atk +10 ranged (1d4+1, dart); multiple targets (fires 1d4 darts
at each target in two adjacent 5-ft. squares); Search DC 14; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 500 gp.

**Poison Dart Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
Atk +8 ranged (1d4 plus poison, dart); poison (bloodroot, DC 12
Fortitude save resists, 0/1d4 Con plus 1d3 Wis); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 18. *Market Price:* 700 gp.

**Poison Needle Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; touch trigger; manual reset;
Atk +8 ranged (1 plus greenblood oil poison); Search DC 22; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 1,300 gp.

**Portcullis Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
Atk +10 melee (3d6); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 20. *Note:* Damage
applies only to those underneath the portcullis. Portcullis blocks
passageway. *Market Price:* 1,400 gp.

**Razor-Wire across Hallway:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; no
reset; Atk +10 melee (2d6, wire); multiple targets (first target in each
of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); Search DC 22; Disable Device DC 15.
*Market Price:* 400 gp.

**Rolling Rock Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
Atk +10 melee (2d6, rock); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 22. *Market
Price:* 1,400 gp.

**Scything Blade Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; automatic
reset; Atk +8 melee (1d8/x3); Search DC 21; Disable Device DC 20.
*Market Price:* 1,700 gp.

**Spear Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset; Atk
+12 ranged (1d8/x3, spear); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 20. *Note:*
200-ft. max range, target determined randomly from those in its path.
Market Price: 1,200 gp.

**Swinging Block Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; touch trigger; manual reset;
Atk +5 melee (4d6, stone block); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 20.
*Market Price:* 500 gp.

**Wall Blade Trap:** CR 1; mechanical; touch trigger; automatic reset;
hidden switch bypass (Search DC 25); Atk +10 melee (2d4/x4, scythe);
Search DC 22; Disable Device DC 22. *Market Price:* 2,500 gp.

### Cr 2 Traps

**Box of Brown Mold:** CR 2; mechanical; touch trigger (opening the
box); automatic reset; 5-ft. cold aura (3d6, cold nonlethal); Search DC
22; Disable Device DC 16. *Market Price:* 3,000 gp.

**Bricks from Ceiling:** CR 2; mechanical; touch trigger; repair reset;
Atk +12 melee (2d6, bricks); multiple targets (all targets in two
adjacent 5-ft. squares); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 20. *Market
Price:* 2,400 gp.

***Burning Hands* Trap:** CR 2; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*burning hands*, 1st-level
wizard, 1d4 fire, DC 11 Reflex save half damage); Search DC 26; Disable
Device DC 26. *Cost:* 500 gp, 40 XP.

**Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 2; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 20 ft. deep (2d6, fall); multiple
targets (first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); Search DC
24; Disable Device DC 19. *Market Price:* 3,400 gp.

***Inflict Light Wounds* Trap:** CR 2; magic device; touch trigger;
automatic reset; spell effect (*inflict light wounds,* 1st-level cleric,
1d8+1, DC 11 Will save half damage); Search DC 26; Disable Device DC 26.
*Cost:* 500 gp, 40 XP.

**Javelin Trap:** CR 2; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset; Atk
+16 ranged (1d6+4, javelin); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 18. *Market
Price:* 4,800 gp.

**Large Net Trap:** CR 2; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
Atk +5 melee (see note); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 25. *Note:*
Characters in 10-ft. square are grappled by net (Str 18) if they fail a
DC 14 Reflex save. *Market Price:* 3,000 gp.

**Pit Trap:** CR 2; mechanical, location trigger; manual reset; DC 20
Reflex save avoids; 40 ft. deep (4d6, fall); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 2,000 gp.

**Poison Needle Trap:** CR 2; mechanical; touch trigger; repair reset;
lock bypass (Open Lock DC 30); Atk +17 melee (1 plus poison, needle);
poison (blue whinnis, DC 14 Fortitude save resists (poison only), 1
Con/unconsciousness); Search DC 22; Disable Device DC 17. *Market
Price:* 4,720 gp.

**Spiked Pit Trap:** CR 2; mechanical; location trigger; automatic
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 20 ft. deep (2d6, fall); multiple
targets (first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); pit spikes
(Atk +10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+2 each); Search DC 18;
Disable Device DC 15. *Market Price:* 1,600 gp.

**Tripping Chain:** CR 2; mechanical; location trigger; automatic reset;
multiple traps (tripping and melee attack); Atk +15 melee touch (trip),
Atk +15 melee (2d4+2, spiked chain); Search DC 15; Disable Device DC 18.
*Market Price:* 3,800 gp. *Note:* This trap is really one CR 1 trap that
trips and a second CR 1 trap that attacks with a spiked chain. If the
tripping attack succeeds, a +4 bonus applies to the spiked chain attack
because the opponent is prone.

**Well-Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 2; mechanical; location trigger;
repair reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 10 ft. deep (1d6, fall); Search
DC 27; Disable Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 4,400 gp.

### Cr 3 Traps

***Burning Hands* Trap:** CR 3; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*burning hands,* 5th-level
wizard, 5d4 fire, DC 11 Reflex save half damage); Search DC 26; Disable
Device DC 26. *Cost:* 2,500 gp, 200 XP.

**Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 3; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 30 ft. deep (3d6, fall); multiple
targets (first target in each of two adjacent squares); Search DC 24;
Disable Device DC 18. *Market Price:* 4,800 gp.

**Ceiling Pendulum:** CR 3; mechanical; timed trigger; automatic reset;
Atk +15 melee (1d12+8/x3, greataxe); Search DC 15; Disable Device DC 27.
*Market Price:* 14,100 gp.

***Fire Trap:***CR 3; spell; spell trigger; no reset; spell effect
(*fire trap,* 3rd-level druid, 1d4+3 fire, DC 13 Reflex save half
damage); Search DC 27; Disable Device DC 27. *Cost:* 85 gp to hire NPC
spellcaster.

**Extended *Bane* Trap:** CR 3; magic device; proximity trigger *(detect
good);* automatic reset; spell effect (extended *bane,* 3rd-level
cleric, DC 13 Will save negates); Search DC 27; Disable Device DC 27.
*Cost:* 3,500 gp, 280 XP.

***Ghoul Touch* Trap:** CR 3; magic device; touch trigger; automatic
reset; spell effect (*ghoul touch,* 3rd-level wizard, DC 13 Fortitude
save negates); Search DC 27; Disable Device DC 27. *Cost:* 3,000 gp, 240
XP.

**Hail of Needles:** CR 3; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
Atk +20 ranged (2d4); Search DC 22; Disable Device DC 22. *Market
Price:* 5,400 gp.

***Acid Arrow* Trap:** CR 3; magic device; proximity trigger *(alarm);*
automatic reset; Atk +2 ranged touch; spell effect (*acid arrow,*
3rd-level wizard, 2d4 acid/round for 2 rounds); Search DC 27; Disable
Device DC 27. *Cost:* 3,000 gp, 240 XP.

**Pit Trap:** CR 3; mechanical, location trigger; manual reset; DC 20
Reflex save avoids; 60 ft. deep (6d6, fall); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 3,000 gp.

**Poisoned Arrow Trap:** CR 3; mechanical; touch trigger; manual reset;
lock bypass (Open Lock DC 30); Atk +12 ranged (1d8 plus poison, arrow);
poison (Large monstrous scorpion venom, DC 14 Fortitude save resists,
1d4 Con/1d4 Con); Search DC 19; Disable Device DC 15. *Market Price:*
2,900 gp.

**Spiked Pit Trap:** CR 3; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 20 ft. deep (2d6, fall); multiple targets
(first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); pit spikes (Atk
+10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+2 each); Search DC 21; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 3,600 gp.

**Stone Blocks from Ceiling:** CR 3; mechanical; location trigger;
repair reset; Atk +10 melee (4d6, stone blocks); Search DC 25; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 5,400 gp.

### Cr 4 Traps

***Bestow Curse* Trap:** CR 4; magic device; touch trigger *(detect
chaos);* automatic reset; spell effect (*bestow curse,* 5th-level
cleric, DC 14 Will save negates); Search DC 28; Disable Device DC 28.
*Cost:* 8,000 gp, 640 XP.

**Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 4; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 40 ft. deep (4d6, fall); multiple
targets (first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); Search DC
25; Disable Device DC 17. *Market Price:* 6,800 gp.

**Collapsing Column:** CR 4; mechanical; touch trigger (attached); no
reset; Atk +15 melee (6d6, stone blocks); Search DC 20; Disable Device
DC 24. *Market Price:* 8,800 gp.

***Glyph of Warding* (Blast):** CR 4; spell; spell trigger; no reset;
spell effect (*glyph of warding* \[blast\], 5th-level cleric, 2d8 acid,
DC 14 Reflex save half damage); multiple targets (all targets within 5
ft.); Search DC 28; Disable Device DC 28. *Cost:* 350 gp to hire NPC
spellcaster.

***Lightning Bolt* Trap:** CR 4; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*lightning bolt,* 5th-level
wizard, 5d6 electricity, DC 14 Reflex save half damage); Search DC 28;
Disable Device DC 28. *Cost:* 7,500 gp, 600 XP.

**Pit Trap:** CR 4; mechanical, location trigger; manual reset; DC 20
Reflex save avoids; 80 ft. deep (8d6, fall); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 4,000 gp.

**Poisoned Dart Trap:** CR 4; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; Atk +15 ranged (1d4+4 plus poison, dart); multiple targets (1
dart per target in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); poison (Small monstrous
centipede poison, DC 10 Fortitude save resists, 1d2 Dex/1d2 Dex); Search
DC 21; Disable Device DC 22. *Market Price:* 12,090 gp.

***Sepia Snake Sigil* Trap:** CR 4; spell; spell trigger; no reset;
spell effect (*sepia snake sigil,* 5th-level wizard, DC 14 Reflex save
negates); Search DC 28; Disable Device DC 28. *Cost:* 650 gp to hire NPC
spellcaster.

**Spiked Pit Trap:** CR 4; mechanical; location trigger; automatic
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 60 ft. deep (6d6, fall); pit spikes
(Atk +10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+5 each); Search DC 20;
Disable Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 4,000 gp.

**Wall Scythe Trap:** CR 4; mechanical; location trigger; automatic
reset; Atk +20 melee (2d4+8/x4, scythe); Search DC 21; Disable Device DC
18. *Market Price:* 17,200 gp.

**Water-Filled Room Trap:** CR 4; mechanical; location trigger;
automatic reset; multiple targets (all targets in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft.
room); never miss; onset delay (5 rounds); liquid; Search DC 17; Disable
Device DC 23. *Market Price:* 11,200 gp.

**Wide-Mouth Spiked Pit Trap:** CR 4; mechanical; location trigger;
manual reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 20 ft. deep (2d6, fall);
multiple targets (first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares);
pit spikes (Atk +10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+2 each); Search
DC 18; Disable Device DC 25. *Market Price:* 7,200 gp.

### Cr 5 Traps

**Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 50 ft. deep (5d6, fall); multiple
targets (first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); Search DC
25; Disable Device DC 17. *Market Price:* 8,500 gp.

**Doorknob Smeared with Contact Poison:** CR 5; mechanical; touch
trigger (attached); manual reset; poison (nitharit, DC 13 Fortitude save
resists, 0/3d6 Con); Search DC 25; Disable Device DC 19. *Market Price:*
9,650 gp.

**Falling Block Trap:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; Atk +15 melee (6d6); multiple targets (can strike all characters
in two adjacent specified squares); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 25.
*Market Price:* 15,000 gp.

***Fire Trap:*** CR 5; spell; spell trigger; no reset; spell effect
(*fire trap,* 7th-level wizard, 1d4+7 fire, DC 16 Reflex save half
damage); Search DC 29; Disable Device DC 29. *Cost:* 305 gp to hire NPC
spellcaster.

***Fireball* Trap:** CR 5; magic device; touch trigger; automatic reset;
spell effect (*fireball,* 8th-level wizard, 8d6 fire, DC 14 Reflex save
half damage); Search DC 28; Disable Device DC 28. *Cost:* 12,000 gp, 960
XP.

**Flooding Room Trap:** CR 5; mechanical; proximity trigger; automatic
reset; no attack roll necessary (see note below); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 25. *Note:* Room floods in 4 rounds. *Market Price:* 17,500
gp.

**Fusillade of Darts:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; Atk +18 ranged (1d4+1, dart); multiple targets (1d8 darts per
target in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 19; Disable Device DC 25.
*Market Price:* 18,000 gp.

**Moving Executioner Statue:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger;
automatic reset; hidden switch bypass (Search DC 25); Atk +16 melee
(1d12+8/x3, greataxe); multiple targets (both arms attack); Search DC
25; Disable Device DC 18. *Market Price:* 22,500 gp.

***Phantasmal Killer* Trap:** CR 5; magic device; proximity trigger
(*alarm* covering the entire room); automatic reset; spell effect
(*phantasmal killer,* 7th-level wizard, DC 16 Will save for disbelief
and DC 16 Fort save for partial effect); Search DC 29; Disable Device DC
29. *Cost:* 14,000 gp, 1,120 XP.

**Pit Trap:** CR 5; mechanical, location trigger; manual reset; DC 20
Reflex save avoids; 100 ft. deep (10d6, fall); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 5,000 gp.

**Poison Wall Spikes:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; Atk +16 melee (1d8+4 plus poison, spike); multiple targets
(closest target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); poison (Medium
monstrous spider venom, DC 12 Fortitude save resists, 1d4 Str/1d4 Str);
Search DC 17; Disable Device DC 21. *Market Price:* 12,650 gp.

**Spiked Pit Trap:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
DC 25 Reflex save avoids; 40 ft. deep (4d6, fall); multiple targets
(first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); pit spikes (Atk
+10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+4 each); Search DC 21; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 13,500 gp.

**Spiked Pit Trap (80 Ft. Deep):** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger,
manual reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 80 ft. deep (8d6, fall), pit
spikes (Atk +10 melee, 1d4 spikes for 1d4+5 each); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 5,000 gp.

**Ungol Dust Vapor Trap:** CR 5; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; gas; multiple targets (all targets in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. room);
never miss; onset delay (2 rounds); poison (ungol dust, DC 15 Fortitude
save resists, 1 Cha/1d6 Cha plus 1 Cha drain); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 16. *Market Price:* 9,000 gp.

### Cr 6 Traps

**Built-to-Collapse Wall:** CR 6; mechanical; proximity trigger; no
reset; Atk +20 melee (8d6, stone blocks); multiple targets (all targets
in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 14; Disable Device DC 16. *Market
Price:* 15,000 gp.

**Compacting Room:** CR 6; mechanical; timed trigger; automatic reset;
hidden switch bypass (Search DC 25); walls move together (12d6, crush);
multiple targets (all targets in a 10-ft.-by- 10-ft. room); never miss;
onset delay (4 rounds); Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 22. *Market
Price:* 25,200 gp.

***Flame Strike* Trap:** CR 6; magic device; proximity trigger *(detect
magic);* automatic reset; spell effect (*flame strike,* 9th-level
cleric, 9d6 fire, DC 17 Reflex save half damage); Search DC 30; Disable
Device DC 30. *Cost:* 22,750 gp, 1,820 XP.

**Fusillade of Spears:** CR 6; mechanical; proximity trigger; repair
reset; Atk +21 ranged (1d8, spear); multiple targets (1d6 spears per
target in a 10 ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 26; Disable Device DC 20.
*Market Price:* 31,200 gp.

***Glyph of Warding* (Blast):** CR 6; spell; spell trigger; no reset;
spell effect (*glyph of warding* \[blast\], 16th-level cleric, 8d8
sonic, DC 14 Reflex save half damage); multiple targets (all targets
within 5 ft.); Search DC 28; Disable Device DC 28. *Cost:* 680 gp to
hire NPC spellcaster.

***Lightning Bolt* Trap:** CR 6; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*lightning bolt,* 10th-level
wizard, 10d6 electricity, DC 14 Reflex save half damage); Search DC 28;
Disable Device DC 28. *Cost:* 15,000 gp, 1,200 XP.

**Spiked Blocks from Ceiling:** CR 6; mechanical; location trigger;
repair reset; Atk +20 melee (6d6, spikes); multiple targets (all targets
in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 24; Disable Device DC 20. *Market
Price:* 21,600 gp.

**Spiked Pit Trap (100 Ft. Deep):** CR 6; mechanical; location trigger,
manual reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 100 ft. deep (10d6, fall); pit
spikes (Atk +10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+5 each); Search DC
20; Disable Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 6,000 gp.

**Whirling Poison Blades:** CR 6; mechanical; timed trigger; automatic
reset; hidden lock bypass (Search DC 25, Open Lock DC 30); Atk +10 melee
(1d4+4/19--20 plus poison, dagger); poison (purple worm poison, DC 24
Fortitude save resists, 1d6 Str/2d6 Str); multiple targets (one target
in each of three preselected 5-ft. squares); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 30,200 gp.

**Wide-Mouth Pit Trap:** CR 6; mechanical; location trigger, manual
reset; DC 25 Reflex save avoids; 40 ft. deep (4d6, fall); multiple
targets (all targets within a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 26;
Disable Device DC 25. *Market Price:* 28,200 gp.

**Wyvern Arrow Trap:** CR 6; mechanical; proximity trigger; manual
reset; Atk +14 ranged (1d8 plus poison, arrow); poison (wyvern poison,
DC 17 Fortitude save resists, 2d6 Con/2d6 Con); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 16. *Market Price:* 17,400 gp.

### Cr 7 Traps

***Acid Fog* Trap:** CR 7; magic device; proximity trigger *(alarm);*
automatic reset; spell effect (*acid fog,* 11th-level wizard, 2d6/round
acid for 11 rounds); Search DC 31; Disable Device DC 31. *Cost:* 33,000
gp, 2,640 XP.

***Blade Barrier* Trap:** CR 7; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*blade barrier,* 11th-level
cleric, 11d6 slashing, DC 19 Reflex save half damage); Search DC 31;
Disable Device DC 31. *Cost:* 33,000 gp, 2,640 XP.

**Burnt Othur Vapor Trap:** CR 7; mechanical; location trigger; repair
reset; gas; multiple targets (all targets in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. room);
never miss; onset delay (3 rounds); poison (burnt othur fumes, DC 18
Fortitude save resists, 1 Con drain/3d6 Con); Search DC 21; Disable
Device DC 21. *Market Price:* 17,500 gp.

***Chain Lightning* Trap:** CR 7; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*chain lightning,* 11th-level
wizard, 11d6 electricity to target nearest center of trigger area plus
5d6 electricity to each of up to eleven secondary targets, DC 19 Reflex
save half damage); Search DC 31; Disable Device DC 31. *Cost:* 33,000
gp, 2,640 XP.

***Black Tentacles* Trap:** CR 7; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* no reset; spell effect (*black tentacles,* 7th-level wizard,
1d4+7 tentacles, Atk +7 melee \[1d6+4, tentacle\]); multiple targets (up
to six tentacles per target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares);
Search DC 29; Disable Device DC 29. *Cost:* 1,400 gp, 112 XP.

**Fusillade of Greenblood Oil Darts:** CR 7; mechanical; location
trigger; manual reset; Atk +18 ranged (1d4+1 plus poison, dart); poison
(greenblood oil, DC 13 Fortitude save resists, 1 Con/ 1d2 Con); multiple
targets (1d8 darts per target in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 25;
Disable Device DC 25. *Market Price:* 33,000 gp.

**Lock Covered in Dragon Bile:** CR 7; mechanical; touch trigger
(attached); no reset; poison (dragon bile, DC 26 Fortitude save resists,
3d6 Str/0); Search DC 27; Disable Device DC 16. *Market Price:* 11,300
gp.

***Summon Monster VI* Trap:** CR 7; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* no reset; spell effect (*summon monster VI,* 11th-level
wizard), Search DC 31; Disable Device DC 31. *Cost:* 3,300 gp, 264 XP.

**Water-Filled Room:** CR 7; mechanical; location trigger; manual reset;
multiple targets (all targets in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. room); never miss;
onset delay (3 rounds); water; Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 25.
*Market Price:* 21,000 gp.

**Well-Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 7; mechanical; location trigger;
repair reset; DC 25 Reflex save avoids; 70 ft. deep (7d6, fall);
multiple targets (first target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares);
Search DC 27; Disable Device DC 18. *Market Price:* 24,500 gp.

### Cr 8 Traps

**Deathblade Wall Scythe:** CR 8; mechanical; touch trigger; manual
reset; Atk +16 melee (2d4+8 plus poison, scythe); poison (deathblade, DC
20 Fortitude save resists, 1d6 Con/2d6 Con); Search DC 24; Disable
Device DC 19. *Market Price:* 31,400 gp.

***Destruction* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; touch trigger *(alarm);*
automatic reset; spell effect (*destruction,* 13th-level cleric, DC 20
Fortitude save for 10d6 damage); Search DC 32; Disable Device DC 32.
*Cost:* 45,500 gp, 3,640 XP.

***Earthquake* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; proximity trigger *(alarm);*
automatic reset; spell effect (*earthquake,* 13th-level cleric, 65-ft.
radius, DC 15 or 20 Reflex save, depending on terrain); Search DC 32;
Disable Device DC 32. *Cost:* 45,500 gp, 3,640 XP.

**Insanity Mist Vapor Trap:** CR 8; mechanical; location trigger; repair
reset; gas; never miss; onset delay (1 round); poison (insanity mist, DC
15 Fortitude save resists, 1d4 Wis/2d6 Wis); multiple targets (all
targets in a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. room); Search DC 25; Disable Device DC 20.
*Market Price:* 23,900 gp.

***Acid Arrow* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; visual trigger *(true
seeing);* automatic reset; multiple traps (two simultaneous *acid arrow*
traps); Atk +9 ranged touch and +9 ranged touch; spell effect (*acid
arrow,* 18th-level wizard, 2d4 acid damage for 7 rounds); Search DC 27;
Disable Device DC 27. *Cost:* 83,500 gp, 4,680 XP. *Note:* This trap is
really two CR 6 *acid arrow* traps that fire simultaneously, using the
same trigger and reset.

***Power Word Stun* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; touch trigger; no reset;
spell effect (*power word stun,* 13th-level wizard), Search DC 32;
Disable Device DC 32. *Cost:* 4,550 gp, 364 XP.

***Prismatic Spray* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*prismatic spray,* 13th-level
wizard, DC 20 Reflex, Fortitude, or Will save, depending on effect);
Search DC 32; Disable Device DC 32. *Cost:* 45,500 gp, 3,640 XP.

***Reverse Gravity* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; proximity trigger
(*alarm,* 10-ft. area); automatic reset; spell effect (*reverse
gravity*, 13th-level wizard, 6d6 fall \[upon hitting the ceiling of the
60-ft.- high room\], then 6d6 fall \[upon falling 60 ft. to the floor
when the spell ends\], DC 20 Reflex save avoids damage); Search DC 32;
Disable Device DC 32. *Cost:* 45,500 gp, 3,640 XP.

**Well-Camouflaged Pit Trap:** CR 8; mechanical; location trigger;
repair reset; DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 100 ft. deep (10d6, fall);
Search DC 27; Disable Device DC 18. *Market Price:* 16,000 gp.

***Word of Chaos* Trap:** CR 8; magic device; proximity trigger *(detect
law);* automatic reset; spell effect (*word of chaos,* 13th-level
cleric); Search DC 32; Disable Device DC 32. *Cost:* 46,000 gp, 3,680
XP.

### Cr 9 Traps

**Drawer Handle Smeared with Contact Poison:** CR 9; mechanical; touch
trigger (attached); manual reset; poison (black lotus extract, DC 20
Fortitude save resists, 3d6 Con/3d6 Con); Search DC 18; Disable Device
DC 26. *Market Price:* 21,600 gp.

**Dropping Ceiling:** CR 9; mechanical; location trigger; repair reset;
ceiling moves down (12d6, crush); multiple targets (all targets in a
10-ft.-by-10-ft. room); never miss; onset delay (1 round); Search DC 20;
Disable Device DC 16. *Market Price:* 12,600 gp.

***Incendiary Cloud* Trap:** CR 9; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*incendiary cloud,* 15th-level
wizard, 4d6/round for 15 rounds, DC 22 Reflex save half damage); Search
DC 33; Disable Device DC 33. *Cost:* 60,000 gp, 4,800 XP.

**Wide-Mouth Pit Trap:** CR 9; mechanical; location trigger; manual
reset; DC 25 Reflex save avoids; 100 ft. deep (10d6, fall); multiple
targets (all targets within a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); Search DC 25;
Disable Device DC 25. *Market Price:* 40,500 gp.

**Wide-Mouth Spiked Pit with Poisoned Spikes:** CR 9; mechanical;
location trigger; manual reset; hidden lock bypass (Search DC 25, Open
Lock DC 30); DC 20 Reflex save avoids; 70 ft. deep (7d6, fall); multiple
targets (all targets within a 10-ft.-by-10-ft. area); pit spikes (Atk
+10 melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+5 plus poison each); poison
(giant wasp poison, DC 14 Fortitude save resists, 1d6 Dex/1d6 Dex);
Search DC 20; Disable Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 11,910 gp.

### Cr 10 Traps

**Crushing Room:** CR 10; mechanical; location trigger; automatic reset;
walls move together (16d6, crush); multiple targets (all targets in a
10-ft.-by-10-ft. room); never miss; onset delay (2 rounds); Search DC
22; Disable Device DC 20. *Market Price:* 29,000 gp.

**Crushing Wall Trap:** CR 10; mechanical; location trigger; automatic
reset; no attack roll required (18d6, crush); Search DC 20; Disable
Device DC 25. Market Price: 25,000 gp.

***Energy Drain* Trap:** CR 10; magic device; visual trigger (*true
seeing*); automatic reset; Atk +8 ranged touch; spell effect (*energy
drain,* 17th-level wizard, 2d4 negative levels for 24 hours, DC 23
Fortitude save negates); Search DC 34; Disable Device DC 34. *Cost:*
124,000 gp, 7,920 XP.

***Forcecage* and *Summon Monster VII* trap:** CR 10; magic device;
proximity trigger *(alarm);* automatic reset; multiple traps (one
*forcecage* trap and one *summon monster VII* trap that summons a
hamatula); spell effect (*forcecage,* 13th-level wizard), spell effect
(*summon monster VII,* 13th-level wizard, hamatula); Search DC 32;
Disable Device DC 32. *Cost:* 241,000 gp, 7,280 XP. *Note:* This trap is
really one CR 8 trap that creates a *forcecage* and a second CR 8 trap
that summons a hamatula in the same area. If both succeed, the hamatula
appears inside the *forcecage.* These effects are independent of each
other.

**Poisoned Spiked Pit Trap:** CR 10; mechanical; location trigger;
manual reset; hidden lock bypass (Search DC 25, Open Lock DC 30); DC 20
Reflex save avoids; 50 ft. deep (5d6, fall); multiple targets (first
target in each of two adjacent 5-ft. squares); pit spikes (Atk +10
melee, 1d4 spikes per target for 1d4+5 plus poison each); poison (purple
worm poison, DC 24 Fortitude save resists, 1d6 Str/2d6 Str); Search DC
16; Disable Device DC 25. *Market Price:* 19,700 gp.

***Wail of the Banshee* Trap:** CR 10; magic device; proximity trigger
*(alarm);* automatic reset; spell effect (*wail of the banshee,*
17th-level wizard, DC 23 Fortitude save negates); multiple targets (up
to 17 creatures); Search DC 34; Disable Device DC 34. *Cost:* 76,500 gp,
6,120 XP.

## Designing a Trap

**Mechanical Traps:** Simply select the elements you want the trap to
have and add up the adjustments to the trap's Challenge Rating that
those elements require (see Table: CR Modifiers for Mechanical Traps) to
arrive at the trap's final CR. From the CR you can derive the DC of the
Craft (trapmaking) checks a character must make to construct the trap.

**Magic Traps:** As with mechanical traps, you don't have to do anything
other than decide what elements you want and then determine the CR of
the resulting trap (see Table: CR Modifiers for Magic Traps). If a
player character wants to design and construct a magic trap, he must
have the Craft Wondrous Item feat. In addition, he must be able to cast
the spell or spells that the trap requires---or, failing that, he must
be able to hire an NPC to cast the spells for him.

### Challenge Rating of a Trap

To calculate the Challenge Rating of a trap, add all the CR modifiers
(see the tables below) to the base CR for the trap type.

**Mechanical Trap:** The base CR for a mechanical trap is 0. If your
final CR is 0 or lower, add features until you get a CR of 1 or higher.

**Magic Trap:** For a spell trap or magic device trap, the base CR is 1.
The highest-level spell used modifies the CR (see Table: CR Modifiers
for Magic Traps).

**Average Damage:** If a trap (either mechanical or magic) does hit
point damage, calculate the average damage for a successful hit and
round that value to the nearest multiple of 7. Use this value to adjust
the Challenge Rating of the trap, as indicated on the tables below.
Damage from poisons and pit spikes does not count toward this value, but
damage from a high strength rating and extra damage from multiple
attacks does.

For a magic trap, only one modifier applies to the CR---either the level
of the highest-level spell used in the trap, or the average damage
figure, whichever is larger.

**Multiple Traps:** If a trap is really two or more connected traps that
affect approximately the same area, determine the CR of each one
separately.

*Multiple Dependent Traps:* If one trap depends on the success of the
other (that is, you can avoid the second trap altogether by not falling
victim to the first), they must be treated as separate traps.

*Multiple Independent Traps:* If two or more traps act independently
(that is, none depends on the success of another to activate), use their
CRs to determine their combined Encounter Level as though they were
monsters. The resulting Encounter Level is the CR for the combined
traps.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- -------------------------- ----
  Feature                                                                                                         CR Modifier                
  Search DC                                                                                                                                  
  15 or lower                                                                                                     --1                        
  25--29                                                                                                          +1                         
  30 or higher                                                                                                    +2                         
  Disable Device DC                                                                                                                          
  15 or lower                                                                                                     --1                        
  25--29                                                                                                          +1                         
  30 or higher                                                                                                    +2                         
  Reflex Save DC (Pit or Other Save-Dependent Trap)                                                                                          
  15 or lower                                                                                                     --1                        
  16--24                                                                                                          ---                        
  25--29                                                                                                          +1                         
  30 or higher                                                                                                    +2                         
  Attack Bonus (Melee or Ranged Attack Trap)                                                                                                 
  +0 or lower                                                                                                     --2                        
  +1 to +5                                                                                                        --1                        
  +6 to +14                                                                                                       ---                        
  +15 to +19                                                                                                      +1                         
  +20 to +24                                                                                                      +2                         
  Damage/Effect                                                                                                                              
  Average damage                                                                                                  +1/7 points\*              
  Miscellaneous Features                                                                                                                     
  Alchemical device                                                                                               Level of spell mimicked    
  Liquid                                                                                                          +5                         
  Multiple target                                                                                                 +1 (or 0 if never miss)    
  Onset delay 1 round                                                                                             +3                         
  Onset delay 2 rounds                                                                                            +2                         
  Onset delay 3 rounds                                                                                            +1                         
  Onset delay 4+ rounds                                                                                           --1                        
  Poison                                                                                                          CR of poison (see below)   
  Black adder venom                                                                                          +1   Large scorpion venom       +3
  Black lotus extract                                                                                        +8   Malyss root paste          +3
  Bloodroot                                                                                                  +1   Medium spider venom        +2
  Blue whinnis                                                                                               +1   Nitharit                   +4
  Burnt othur fumes                                                                                          +6   Purple worm poison         +4
  Deathblade                                                                                                 +5   Sassone leaf residue       +3
  Dragon bile                                                                                                +6   Shadow essence             +3
  Giant wasp poison                                                                                          +3   Small centipede poison     +1
  Greenblood oil                                                                                             +1   Terinav root               +5
  Insanity mist                                                                                              +4   Ungol dust                 +3
  Wyvern poison                                                                                              +5                              
  Pit spikes                                                                                                      +1                         
  Touch attack                                                                                                    +1                         
  \* Rounded to the nearest multiple of 7 (round up for an average that lies exactly between two numbers).                                   
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- -------------------------- ----

  : Table: CR Modifiers for Mechanical Traps

  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------
  Feature                                                              CR Modifier
  Highest-level spell                                                  \+ Spell level OR +1 per 7 points of average damage per round\*
  \*See the note following Table: CR Modifiers for Mechanical Traps.   
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------

  : Table: CR Modifiers for Magic Traps

### Mechanical Trap Cost

The base cost of a mechanical trap is 1,000 gp. Apply all the modifiers
from Table: Cost Modifiers for Mechanical Traps for the various features
you've added to the trap to get the modified base cost.

The final cost is equal to (modified base cost x Challenge Rating) +
extra costs. The minimum cost for a mechanical trap is (CR x 100) gp.

After you've multiplied the modified base cost by the Challenge Rating,
add the price of any alchemical items or poison you incorporated into
the trap. If the trap uses one of these elements and has an automatic
reset, multiply the poison or alchemical item cost by 20 to provide an
adequate supply of doses.

**Multiple Traps:** If a trap is really two or more connected traps,
determine the final cost of each separately, then add those values
together. This holds for both multiple dependent and multiple
independent traps (see the previous section).

  ---------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  Feature                                                    Cost Modifier
  Trigger Type                                               
  Location                                                   ---
  Proximity                                                  +1,000 gp
  Touch                                                      ---
  Touch (attached)                                           --100 gp
  Timed                                                      +1,000 gp
  Reset Type                                                 
  No reset                                                   --500 gp
  Repair                                                     --200 gp
  Manual                                                     ---
  Automatic                                                  +500 gp (or 0 if trap has timed trigger)
  Bypass Type                                                
  Lock                                                       +100 gp (Open Lock DC 30)
  Hidden switch                                              +200 gp (Search DC 25)
  Hidden lock                                                +300 gp (Open Lock DC 30, Search DC 25)
  Search DC                                                  
  19 or lower                                                --100 gp x (20 -- DC)
  20                                                         ---
  21 or higher                                               +200 gp x (DC -- 20)
  Disable Device DC                                          
  19 or lower                                                --100 gp x (20 -- DC)
  20                                                         ---
  21 or higher                                               +200 gp x (DC -- 20)
  Reflex Save DC (Pit or Other Save-Dependent Trap)          
  19 or lower                                                --100 gp x (20 -- DC)
  20                                                         ---
  21 or higher                                               +300 gp x (DC -- 20)
  Attack Bonus (Melee or Ranged Attack Trap)                 
  +9 or lower                                                --100 gp x (10 -- bonus)
  +10                                                        ---
  +11 or higher                                              +200 gp x (bonus -- 10)
  Damage Bonus                                               
  High strength rating (ranged attack trap)                  +100 gp x bonus (max +4)
  High Strength bonus (melee attack trap)                    +100 gp x bonus (max +8)
  Miscellaneous Features                                     
  Never miss                                                 +1,000 gp
  Poison                                                     Cost of poison\*
  Alchemical item                                            Cost of item\*
  \* Multiply cost by 20 if trap features automatic reset.   
  ---------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------

  : Table: Cost Modifiers for Mechanical Traps

### Magic Device Trap Cost

Building a magic device trap involves the expenditure of experience
points as well as gold pieces, and requires the services of a
spellcaster. Table: Cost Modifiers for Magic Device Traps summarizes the
cost information for magic device traps. If the trap uses more than one
spell (for instance, a sound or visual trigger spell in addition to the
main spell effect), the builder must pay for them all (except *alarm*,
which is free unless it must be cast by an NPC; see below).

The costs derived from Table: Cost Modifiers for Magic Device Traps
assume that the builder is casting the necessary spells himself (or
perhaps some other PC is providing the spells for free). If an NPC
spellcaster must be hired to cast them those costs must be factored in
as well.

A magic device trap takes one day to construct per 500 gp of its cost.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Feature                           | Cost Modifier                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| *Alarm* spell used in trigger     | ---                               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| One-Shot Trap                     |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Each spell used in trap           | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | +50 gp x caster level x spell     |
|                                   | level,                            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | +4 XP x caster level x spell      |
|                                   | level                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Material components               | \+ Cost of all material           |
|                                   | components                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XP components                     | \+ Total of XP components x 5 gp  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Automatic Reset Trap              |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Each spell used in trap           | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | +500 gp x caster level x spell    |
|                                   | level,                            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | +40 XP x caster level x spell     |
|                                   | level                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Material components               | \+ Cost of all material           |
|                                   | components x 100 gp               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| XP components                     | \+ Total of XP components x 500   |
|                                   | gp                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

: Table: Cost Modifiers for Magic Device Traps

### Spell Trap Cost

A spell trap has a cost only if the builder must hire an NPC spellcaster
to cast it.

### Craft Dcs for Mechanical Traps

Once you know the Challenge Rating of a trap determine the Craft
(trapmaking) DC by referring to the table and the modifiers given below.

  --------- ----------------------------
  Trap CR   Base Craft (Trapmaking) DC
  1--3      20
  4--6      25
  7--10     30
  --------- ----------------------------

  ----------------------- -----------------------------------
  Additional Components   Modifier to Craft (Trapmaking) DC
  Proximity trigger       +5
  Automatic reset         +5
  ----------------------- -----------------------------------

**Making the Checks:** To determine how much progress a character makes
on building a trap each week, that character makes a Craft (trapmaking)
check. See the Craft skill description for details on Craft checks and
the circumstances that can affect them.
