---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Monsters / Monsters (Di-Do)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MONSTERS (Di-Do)

## Table of Contents

-   [Digester](#digester)
    -   [Combat](#digester--combat)
-   [Dinosaur](#dinosaur)
    -   [Combat](#dinosaur--combat)
    -   [Deinonychus](#deinonychus)
        -   [Combat](#deinonychus--combat)
    -   [Elasmosaurus](#elasmosaurus)
        -   [Combat](#elasmosaurus--combat)
    -   [Megaraptor](#megaraptor)
    -   [Triceratops](#triceratops)
        -   [Combat](#triceratops--combat)
    -   [Tyrannosaurus](#tyrannosaurus)
        -   [Combat](#tyrannosaurus--combat)
-   [Dire Animal](#dire-animal)
    -   [Dire Ape](#dire-ape)
        -   [Combat](#dire-ape--combat)
    -   [Dire Badger](#dire-badger)
        -   [Combat](#dire-badger--combat)
    -   [Dire Bat](#dire-bat)
        -   [Combat](#dire-bat--combat)
    -   [Dire Bear](#dire-bear)
        -   [Combat](#dire-bear--combat)
    -   [Dire Boar](#dire-boar)
        -   [Combat](#dire-boar--combat)
    -   [Dire Lion](#dire-lion)
        -   [Combat](#dire-lion--combat)
    -   [Dire Rat](#dire-rat)
        -   [Combat](#dire-rat--combat)
    -   [Dire Shark](#dire-shark)
        -   [Combat](#dire-shark--combat)
    -   [Dire Tiger](#dire-tiger)
        -   [Combat](#dire-tiger--combat)
    -   [Dire Weasel](#dire-weasel)
        -   [Combat](#dire-weasel--combat)
    -   [Dire Wolf](#dire-wolf)
        -   [Combat](#dire-wolf--combat)
    -   [Dire Wolverine](#dire-wolverine)
        -   [Combat](#dire-wolverine--combat)
-   [Doppelganger](#doppelganger)
    -   [Combat](#doppelganger--combat)
    -   [Doppelgangers as Characters](#doppelgangers-as-characters)

## Digester

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Magical Beast
  Hit Dice:              8d10+24 (68 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 60 ft. (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (+2 Dex, +5 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +8/+11
  Attack:                Claw +11 melee (1d8+4)
  Full Attack:           Claw +11 melee (1d8+4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Acid spray
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to acid, low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +10, Will +3
  Abilities:             Str 17, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +9, Listen +6, Jump +21, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes
  Environment:           Warm forests
  Organization:          Solitary or pack (3--6)
  Challenge Rating:      6
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           9--12 HD (Medium); 13--24 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------

A digester stands about 5 feet tall and is 7 feet long from snout to
tail. It weighs about 350 pounds,

### Combat {#digester--combat}

A digester is a hunting and eating machine. When it is not hungry (which
is rarely), it lies low and avoids most other creatures. When hunting,
it looks about for a likely target, then charges forth and delivers a
gout of acid. If the initial attack is insufficient to kill the prey,
the digester attacks with its hind feet until it can spray acid again.

**Acid Spray (Ex):** A digester can spray acid in a 20-foot cone,
dealing 4d8 points of damage to everything in the area. Once a digester
uses this ability, it can't use it again until 1d4 rounds later.

The creature can also produce a concentrated stream of acid that deals
8d8 points of damage to a single target within 5 feet. In either case, a
DC 17 Reflex save halves the damage. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Skills:** A digester's coloration gives it a +4 racial bonus on Hide
checks. It also has a +4 racial bonus on Jump checks.

## Dinosaur

Dinosaurs come in many sizes and shapes. Bigger varieties have drab
coloration, while smaller dinosaurs have more colorful markings. Most
dinosaurs have a pebbly skin texture.

### Combat {#dinosaur--combat}

Dinosaurs take full advantage of their size and speed. The swift
carnivores stalk prey, staying hidden in cover until they can get into
charge range and rush to the attack. Herbivores frequently overrun and
trample their opponents.

### Deinonychus

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              4d8+16 (34 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 60 ft. (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           16 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+11
  Attack:                Talons +6 melee (2d6+4)
  Full Attack:           Talons +6 melee (2d6+4) and 2 foreclaws +1 melee (1d3+2) and bite +1 melee (2d4+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Pounce
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +8, Ref +6, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 19, Dex 15, Con 19, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +8, Jump +26, Listen +10, Spot +10, Survival +10
  Feats:                 Run, Track
  Environment:           Warm forests
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or pack (3--6)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           5--8 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A deinonychus is bright green along its back and flanks, with a much
lighter shade of the same color on its underside. The body has darker
spots or stripes. Its tail extends straight out behind itself, held
aloft by an intricate structure of bony supports, thus allowing its
weight to be carried entirely by the back legs. It weighs about 600
pounds.

#### Combat {#deinonychus--combat}

A deinonychus uses a combination of speed, grasping forearms, large
teeth, and hind legs with ripping talons. It hunts by running at prey,
leaping, and ripping with its rear talons as it claws and bites. The
talons count as one attack. A deinonychus has a relatively large brain
for a dinosaur, and its pack hunts with cunning tactics.

**Pounce (Ex):** If a deinonychus charges, it can make a full attack.

**Skills:** A deinonychus has a +8 racial bonus on Hide, Jump, Listen,
Spot, and Survival checks.

### Elasmosaurus

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Animal
  Hit Dice:              10d8+66 (111 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), swim 50 ft.
  Armor Class:           13 (--2 size, +2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 11
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+23
  Attack:                Bite +13 melee (2d8+12)
  Full Attack:           Bite +13 melee (2d8+12)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +15, Ref +9, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 26, Dex 14, Con 22, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 9
  Skills:                Hide --4\*, Listen +4, Spot +9, Swim +16
  Feats:                 Dodge, Great Fortitude, Toughness (2)
  Environment:           Warm aquatic
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or herd (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           11--20 HD (Huge); 21--30 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

Though it resides primarily in the water, an elasmosaurus only breathes
air. An elasmosaurus has a total length of some 30 feet, including a
tail half as long as its entire body, and weighs about 5,000 pounds.
Observers who see only its head or tail might easily mistake it for a
massive snake.

#### Combat {#elasmosaurus--combat}

An elasmosaurus is aggressive and attacks anything it notices. The
creature is strong, fast, and highly maneuverable, able to turn quickly
and lunge at prey. When hunting, it travels with its head out of the
water, snapping down quickly to seize prey.

**Skills:** \*An elasmosaurus has a +8 racial bonus on Hide checks in
water.

### Megaraptor

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Animal
  Hit Dice:              8d8+43 (79 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 60 ft. (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           16 (--2 size, +2 Dex, +6 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+19
  Attack:                Talons +9 melee (2d8+5)
  Full Attack:           Talons +9 melee (2d8+5) and 2 foreclaws +4 melee (1d4+2) and bite +4 melee (2d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Pounce
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +10, Ref +8, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 15, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +5, Jump +27, Listen +12, Spot +12, Survival +12
  Feats:                 Run, Toughness, Track
  Environment:           Warm forests
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or pack (3--6)
  Challenge Rating:      6
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           9--16 HD (Huge); 17--24 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This creature is a larger version of the deinonychus, standing about 12
feet tall with a total length of 24 feet. It has the same appearance,
habits, and abilities of the smaller version.

**Pounce (Ex):** If a megaraptor charges, it can make a full attack.

**Skills:** A megaraptor has a +8 racial bonus on Hide, Jump, Listen,
Spot, and Survival checks.

### Triceratops

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Animal
  Hit Dice:              16d8+124 (196 hp)
  Initiative:            --1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           18 (--2 size, --1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+30
  Attack:                Gore +20 melee (2d8+15)
  Full Attack:           Gore +20 melee (2d8+15)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Powerful charge, trample 2d12+15
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +19, Ref +9, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 30, Dex 9, Con 25, Int 1, Wis 12, Cha 7
  Skills:                Listen +13, Spot +12
  Feats:                 Alertness, Great Fortitude, Toughness (4)
  Environment:           Temperate plains
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or herd (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           17--32 HD (Huge); 33--48 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------

A triceratops has a body about 25 feet long and weighs about 20,000
pounds.

#### Combat {#triceratops--combat}

These creatures are likely to charge and skewer any creature of at least
Large size that infringes on their territory. A triceratops uses its
trample attack on smaller opponents.

**Powerful Charge (Ex):** When a triceratops charges, its gore attack
deals 4d8+20 points of damage.

**Trample (Ex):** Reflex half DC 28. The save DC is Strength-based.

### Tyrannosaurus

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Animal
  Hit Dice:              18d8+99 (180 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           14 (--2 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural) touch 9, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +13/+30
  Attack:                Bite +20 melee (3d6+13)
  Full Attack:           Bite +20 melee (3d6+13)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, swallow whole
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 28, Dex 12, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 15, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide --2, Listen +14, Spot +14
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Natural Attack (bite), Run, Toughness (3), Track
  Environment:           Warm plains
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      8
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           19--36 HD (Huge); 37--54 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Despite its enormous size and 6-ton weight, a tyrannosaurus is a swift
runner. Its head is nearly 6 feet long, and its teeth are from 3 to 6
inches in length. It is slightly more than 30 feet long from nose to
tail.

#### Combat {#tyrannosaurus--combat}

A tyrannosaurus pursues and eats just about anything it sees. Its
tactics are simple---charge in and bite.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a tyrannosaurus must hit an
opponent of up to one size smaller with its bite attack. It can then
attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack
of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and
can try to swallow the foe the following round.

**Swallow Whole (Ex):** A tyrannosaurus can try to swallow a grabbed
opponent of up to two sizes smaller by making a successful grapple
check. The swallowed creature takes 2d8+8 points of bludgeoning damage
and 8 points of acid damage per round from the tyrannosaurus's gizzard.
A swallowed creature can cut its way out by using a light slashing or
piercing weapon to deal 25 points of damage to the gizzard (AC 12). Once
the creature exits, muscular action closes the hole; another swallowed
opponent must cut its own way out.

A Huge tyrannosaurus's gizzard can hold 2 Medium, 8 Small, 32 Tiny, or
128 Diminutive or smaller opponents.

**Skills:** A tyrannosaurus has a +2 racial bonus on Listen and Spot
checks.

## Dire Animal

Dire animals are larger, tougher, meaner versions of ordinary animals.
Each kind tends to have a feral, prehistoric, or even demonic
appearance.

### Dire Ape

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              5d8+13 (35 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), climb 15 ft.
  Armor Class:           15 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+13
  Attack:                Claw +8 melee (1d6+6)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +8 melee (1d6+6) and bite +3 melee (1d8+3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Rend 2d6+9
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 22, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 7
  Skills:                Climb +14, Listen +5, Move Silently +4, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Alertness, Toughness
  Environment:           Warm forests
  Organization:          Solitary or company (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           6--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

A dire ape stands about 9 feet tall and weighs from 800 to 1,200 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-ape--combat}

Dire apes attack anything that enters their territory, even other dire
apes. If an opponent's armor foils a dire ape's attacks, the creature
will attempt to grapple and pin, then rend the prone opponent.

**Rend (Ex):** A dire ape that hits with both claw attacks latches onto
the opponent's body and tears the flesh. This attack automatically deals
an extra 2d6+12 points of damage.

**Skills:** Dire apes have a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can
always choose to take 10 on Climb checks, even if rushed or threatened.

### Dire Badger

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Animal
  Hit Dice:              3d8+15 (28 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), burrow 10 ft.
  Armor Class:           16 (+3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/+4
  Attack:                Claw +4 melee (1d4+2)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +4 melee (1d4+2) and bite --1 melee (1d6+1)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Rage
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 14, Dex 17, Con 19, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Listen +6, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Alertness, Toughness, Track^B^
  Environment:           Temperate forests
  Organization:          Solitary or cete (2--5)
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           4--9 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------

These vicious creatures tolerate no intrusions. They cannot burrow into
solid rock, but can move through just about any material softer than
that. A dire badger usually leaves behind a usable tunnel 5 feet in
diameter when burrowing unless the material it's moving through is very
loose.

A dire badger is from 5 to 7 feet in length and can weigh up to 500
pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-badger--combat}

Dire badgers attack with their sharp claws and teeth.

**Rage (Ex):** A dire badger that takes damage in combat flies into a
berserk rage on its next turn, clawing and biting madly until either it
or its opponent is dead. It gains +4 Strength, +4 Constitution, and --2
AC. The creature cannot end its rage voluntarily.

### Dire Bat

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              4d8+12 (30 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 40 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           20 (--1 size, +6 Dex, +5 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+10
  Attack:                Bite +5 melee (1d8+4)
  Full Attack:           Bite +5 melee (1d8+4)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Blindsense 40 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 17, Dex 22, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 14, Cha 6
  Skills:                Hide +4, Listen +12\*, Move Silently +11, Spot +8\*
  Feats:                 Alertness, Stealthy
  Environment:           Temperate deserts
  Organization:          Solitary or colony (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           5--12 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

A dire bat has a wingspan of 15 feet and weighs about 200 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-bat--combat}

Dire bats swoop down upon unsuspecting prey from above.

**Blindsense (Ex):** A dire bat uses echolocation to pinpoint creatures
within 40 feet. Opponents still have total concealment against the bat
unless it can actually see them.

**Skills:** Dire bats have a +4 racial bonus on Spot and Listen checks.
These bonuses are lost if its blindsense is negated.

### Dire Bear

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              12d8+51 (105 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +9/+23
  Attack:                Claw +19 melee (2d4+10)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +19 melee (2d4+10) and bite +13 melee (2d8+5)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +12, Ref +9, Will +9
  Abilities:             Str 31, Dex 13, Con 19, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Listen +10, Spot +10, Swim +13
  Feats:                 Alertness, Endurance, Run, Toughness, Weapon Focus (claw)
  Environment:           Cold forests
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           13--16 HD (Large); 17--36 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

The omnivorous dire bear usually does not bother creatures that try to
avoid it, but will aggressively defend a kill or other source of food.
It will not hesitate to rip apart anything that might contain something
edible.

A typical dire bear is 12 feet long and weighs as much as 8,000 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-bear--combat}

A dire bear attacks by tearing at opponents with its claws.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a dire bear must hit with a
claw attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity.

### Dire Boar

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              7d8+21 (52 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           15 (--1 size, +6 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +5/+17
  Attack:                Gore +12 melee (1d8+12)
  Full Attack:           Gore +12 melee (1d8+12)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Ferocity
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +8, Ref +5, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 27, Dex 10, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
  Skills:                Listen +8, Spot +8
  Feats:                 Alertness, Endurance, Iron Will
  Environment:           Temperate forests
  Organization:          Solitary or herd (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      4
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           8--16 HD (Large); 17--21 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------

Dire boars are omnivorous and spend most of their time rooting around,
much as ordinary pigs do. They viciously attack anything that approaches
them, however.

Dire boars grow up to 12 feet long and weigh as much as 2,000 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-boar--combat}

A dire boar charges its opponent, trying to rip the target open with its
tusks.

**Ferocity (Ex):** A dire boar is such a tenacious combatant that it
continues to fight without penalty even while disabled or dying.

### Dire Lion

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              8d8+24 (60 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           15 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+17
  Attack:                Claw +13 melee (1d6+7)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +13 melee (1d6+7) and bite +7 melee (1d8+3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, pounce, rake 1d6+3
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +7
  Abilities:             Str 25, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +2\*, Listen +7, Move Silently +5, Spot +7
  Feats:                 Alertness, Run, Weapon Focus (claw)
  Environment:           Warm plains
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or pride (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      5
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           9--16 HD (Large); 17--24 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

Dire lions are patient hunters, just like their smaller cousins, but apt
to take on bigger prey.

Dire lions grow to be up to 15 feet long and weigh up to 3,500 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-lion--combat}

A dire lion attacks by running at prey, leaping, and clawing and biting
as it rakes with its rear claws. It often jumps onto a creature larger
than itself.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a dire lion must hit with
its bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple
check, it establishes a hold and can rake.

**Pounce (Ex):** If a dire lion charges, it can make a full attack,
including two rake attacks.

**Rake (Ex):** Attack bonus +12 melee, damage 1d6+3.

**Skills:** Dire lions have a +4 racial bonus on Hide and Move Silently
checks.

\*In areas of tall grass or heavy undergrowth, the Hide bonus improves
to +8.

### Dire Rat

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Small Animal
  Hit Dice:              1d8+1 (5 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), climb 20 ft.
  Armor Class:           15 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +1 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 12
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +0/--4
  Attack:                Bite +4 melee (1d4 plus disease)
  Full Attack:           Bite +4 melee (1d4 plus disease)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Disease
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +5, Will +3
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 17, Con 12, Int 1, Wis 12, Cha 4
  Skills:                Climb +11, Hide +8, Listen +4, Move Silently +4, Spot +4, Swim +11
  Feats:                 Alertness, Weapon Finesse^B^
  Environment:           Any
  Organization:          Solitary or pack (11--20)
  Challenge Rating:      1/3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           2--3 HD (Small); 4--6 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------

Dire rats are omnivorous scavengers, but will attack to defend their
nests and territories.

A dire rat can grow to be up to 4 feet long and weigh over 50 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-rat--combat}

Dire rat packs attack fearlessly, biting and chewing with their sharp
incisors.

**Disease (Ex):** Filth fever---bite, Fortitude DC 11, incubation period
1d3 days, damage 1d3 Dex and 1d3 Con. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Skills:** Dire rats have a +8 racial bonus on Swim checks. Dire rats
have a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always choose to take 10
on Climb checks, even if rushed or threatened.

Dire rats use their Dexterity modifier for Climb and Swim checks.

### Dire Shark

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Animal (Aquatic)
  Hit Dice:              18d8+66 (147 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 Swim 60 ft. (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (--2 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +13/+27
  Attack:                Bite +18 melee (2d8+9)
  Full Attack:           Bite +18 melee (2d8+9)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, swallow whole
  Special Qualities:     Keen scent
  Saves:                 Fort +14, Ref +13, Will +12
  Abilities:             Str 23, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 1, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Listen +12, Spot +11, Swim +14
  Feats:                 Improved Natural Attack (bite), Toughness (4), Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           Cold aquatic
  Organization:          Solitary or school (2--5)
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           19--32 (Huge); 33--54 (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------

Dire sharks attack anything they perceive to be edible, even larger
creatures.

This monstrous fish can grow to a length of 25 feet and weigh more than
20,000 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-shark--combat}

Dire sharks bite with their powerful jaws, swallowing smaller creatures
in one gulp.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a dire shark must hit with
its bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple
check, it establishes a hold and can try to swallow the foe in the
following round.

**Swallow Whole (Ex):** A dire shark can try to swallow a grabbed
opponent of up to one size smaller by making a successful grapple check.
Once inside, the opponent takes 2d6+6 points of bludgeoning damage plus
1d8+4 points of acid damage per round from the shark's digestive juices.
A swallowed creature can cut its way out using a light slashing or
piercing weapon by dealing 25 points of damage to the shark's digestive
tract (AC 13). Once the creature exits, muscular action closes the hole;
another swallowed opponent must cut its own way out.

A Huge dire shark's gullet can hold 2 Large, 8 Medium or Small, 32 Tiny,
128 Diminutive, or 512 Fine or smaller opponents.

**Keen Scent (Ex):** A dire shark can notice creatures by scent in a
180-foot radius and can detect blood in the water at a range of up to 1
mile.

**Skills:** A dire shark has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to
perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to
take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered.

It can use the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a
straight line.

### Dire Tiger

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              16d8+48 (120 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+24
  Attack:                Claw +20 melee (2d4+8)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +20 melee (2d4+8) and bite +14 melee (2d6+4)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, pounce, rake 2d4+4
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 27, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +7\*, Jump +14, Listen +6, Move Silently +11, Spot +7, Swim +10
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Natural Attack (claw), Improved Natural Attack (bite), Run, Stealthy, Weapon Focus (claw)
  Environment:           Warm forests
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      8
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           17--32 HD (Large); 33--48 (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dire tigers prey on just about anything that moves. They will patiently
stalk a potential meal, striking whenever the creature lets down its
guard.

Dire tigers grow to be over 12 feet long and can weigh up to 6,000
pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-tiger--combat}

A dire tiger attacks by running at prey, leaping, and clawing and biting
as it rakes with its rear claws.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a dire tiger must hit with
its bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple
check, it establishes a hold and can rake.

**Pounce (Ex):** If a dire tiger charges, it can make a full attack,
including two rake attacks.

**Rake (Ex):** Attack bonus +18 melee, damage 2d4+4.

**Skills:** Dire tigers have a +4 racial bonus on Hide and Move Silently
checks. \*In areas of tall grass or heavy undergrowth, the Hide bonus
improves to +8.

### Dire Weasel

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Animal
  Hit Dice:              3d8 (13 hp)
  Initiative:            +4
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           16 (+4 Dex, +2 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 12
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/+4
  Attack:                Bite +6 melee (1d6+3)
  Full Attack:           Bite +6 melee (1d6+3)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Attach, blood drain
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +7, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 14, Dex 19, Con 10, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 11
  Skills:                Hide +8, Listen +3, Move Silently +8, Spot +5
  Feats:                 Alertness, Stealthy , Weapon Finesse^B^
  Environment:           Temperate hills
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           4--6 HD (Medium); 7--9 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

Dire weasels grow to be up to 10 feet long and can reach a weight of 700
pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-weasel--combat}

Dire weasels stalk their prey in the dark and then leap on it, biting
and clawing.

**Attach (Ex):** A dire weasel that hits with its bite attack latches
onto the opponent's body with its powerful jaws. An attached dire weasel
loses its Dexterity bonus to AC and thus has an AC of 12. An attached
dire weasel can be struck with a weapon or grappled itself. To remove an
attached dire weasel through grappling, the opponent must achieve a pin
against the creature.

**Blood Drain (Ex):** A dire weasel drains blood for 1d4 points of
Constitution damage each round it remains attached.

### Dire Wolf

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              6d8+18 (45 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares)
  Armor Class:           14 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 12
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +4/+15
  Attack:                Bite +11 melee (1d8+10)
  Full Attack:           Bite +11 melee (1d8+10)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Trip
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 25, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +0, Listen +7, Move Silently +4, Spot +7, Survival +2\*
  Feats:                 Alertness, Run, Track^B^, Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           Temperate forests
  Organization:          Solitary or pack (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           7--18 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------

Dire wolves are efficient pack hunters that will kill anything they can
catch.

Dire wolves are mottled gray or black, about 9 feet long and weighing
some 800 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-wolf--combat}

Dire wolves prefer to attack in packs, surrounding and flanking a foe
when they can.

**Trip (Ex):** A dire wolf that hits with a bite attack can attempt to
trip its opponent (+11 check modifier) as a free action without making a
touch attack or provoking an attack of opportunity. If the attempt
fails, the opponent cannot react to trip the dire wolf.

**Skills:** A dire wolf has a +2 racial bonus on Hide, Listen, Move
Silently, and Spot checks.

\*It also has a +4 racial bonus on Survival checks when tracking by
scent.

### Dire Wolverine

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Animal
  Hit Dice:              5d8+23 (45 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), climb 10 ft.
  Armor Class:           16 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+13
  Attack:                Claw +8 melee (1d6+6)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +8 melee (1d6+6) and bite +3 melee (1d8+3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Rage
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 22, Dex 17, Con 19, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Climb +14, Listen +7, Spot +7
  Feats:                 Alertness, Toughness, Track^B^
  Environment:           Cold forests
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      4
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           6--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

Dire wolverines grow to about 12 feet in length and can weigh as much as
2,000 pounds.

#### Combat {#dire-wolverine--combat}

Dire wolverines attack opponents wantonly, fearing no other creatures.

**Rage (Ex):** A dire wolverine that takes damage in combat flies into a
berserk rage on its next turn, clawing and biting madly until either it
or its opponent is dead. An enraged dire wolverine gains +4 Strength, +4
Constitution, and --2 AC. The creature cannot end its rage voluntarily.

**Skills:** A dire wolverine has a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and
can always choose to take 10 on Climb checks, even if rushed or
threatened.

## Doppelganger

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Monstrous Humanoid (Shapechanger)
  Hit Dice:              4d8+4 (22 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           15 (+1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +4/+5
  Attack:                Slam +5 melee (1d6+1)
  Full Attack:           Slam +5 melee (1d6+1)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Detect thoughts
  Special Qualities:     Change shape, immunity to *sleep* and charm effects
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +5, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 12, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 14, Cha 13
  Skills:                Bluff +10\*, Diplomacy +3, Disguise +9\* (+11 acting), Intimidate +3, Listen +6, Sense Motive +6, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Dodge, Great Fortitude
  Environment:           Any
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or gang (3--6)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              Double standard
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +4
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Doppelgangers are strange beings that are able to take on the shapes of
those they encounter. In its natural form, the creature looks more or
less humanoid, but slender and frail, with gangly limbs and half-formed
features. The flesh is pale and hairless. Its large, bulging eyes are
yellow with slitted pupils. A doppelganger's appearance is deceiving
even when it's in its true form. A doppelganger is hardy, with a natural
agility not in keeping with its frail appearance.

Doppelgangers make excellent use of their natural mimicry to stage
ambushes, bait traps, and infiltrate humanoid society. Although not
usually evil, they are interested only in themselves and regard all
others as playthings to be manipulated and deceived.

It is natural form a doppelganger is about 5-1/2 feet tall and weighs
about 150 pounds.

### Combat {#doppelganger--combat}

When in its natural form, a doppelganger strikes with its powerful
fists. In the shape of a warrior or some other armed person, it attacks
with whatever weapon is appropriate. In such cases, it uses its detect
thoughts ability to employ the same tactics and strategies as the person
it is impersonating.

**Detect Thoughts (Su):** A doppelganger can continuously use detect
thoughts as the spell (caster level 18th; Will DC 13 negates). It can
suppress or resume this ability as a free action. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Change Shape (Su):** A doppelganger can assume the shape of any Small
or Medium humanoid. In humanoid form, the doppelganger loses its natural
attacks. A doppelganger can remain in its humanoid form until it chooses
to assume a new one. A change in form cannot be dispelled, but a
doppelganger reverts to its natural form when killed. A *true seeing*
spell or ability reveals its natural form.

**Skills:** A doppelganger has a +4 racial bonus on Bluff and Disguise
checks.

\*When using its change shape ability, a doppelganger gets an additional
+10 circumstance bonus on Disguise checks. If it can read an opponent's
mind, it gets a further +4 circumstance bonus on Bluff and Disguise
checks.

### Doppelgangers as Characters

Doppelganger characters possess the following racial traits.

--- +2 Strength, +2, Dexterity, +2 Constitution, +2 Intelligence, +4
Wisdom, +2 Charisma.

---Medium size.

---A doppelganger's base land speed is 30 feet.

---Darkvision: Doppelgangers can see in the dark up to 60 feet.

---Racial Hit Dice: A doppelganger begins with four levels of monstrous
humanoid, which provide 4d8 Hit Dice, a base attack bonus of +4, and
base saving throw bonuses of Fort +1, Ref +4, and Will +4.

---Racial Skills: A doppelganger's monstrous humanoid levels give it
skill points equal to 7 x (2 + Int modifier). Its class skills are
Bluff, Diplomacy, Disguise, Intimidate, Listen, Sense Motive, and Spot.

---Racial Feats: A doppelganger's monstrous humanoid levels give it two
feats.

--- +4 natural armor bonus.

--- +4 racial bonus on Bluff and Disguise checks. When using its change
shape ability, a doppelganger gets an additional +10 circumstance bonus
on Disguise checks. If it can read an opponent's mind, it gets a further
+4 circumstance bonus on Bluff and Disguise checks.

---Special Attacks (see above): Detect thoughts.

---Special Qualities (see above): Change shape, immunity to *sleep* and
charm effects.

---Automatic Languages: Common. Bonus Languages: Auran, Dwarven, Elven,
Gnome, Halfling, Giant, Terran.

---Favored Class: Rogue.

---Level adjustment +4.
