---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Monsters / Monsters (D-De)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MONSTERS (D-De)

## Table of Contents

-   [Darkmantle](#darkmantle)
    -   [Combat](#darkmantle--combat)
-   [Delver](#delver)
    -   [Combat](#delver--combat)
-   [Demon](#demon)
    -   [Babau](#babau)
        -   [Combat](#babau--combat)
    -   [Balor](#balor)
        -   [Combat](#balor--combat)
        -   [Tactics Round-by-Round](#balor--tactics-round-by-round)
    -   [Bebilith](#bebilith)
    -   [Combat](#demon--combat)
    -   [Dretch](#dretch)
        -   [Combat](#dretch--combat)
    -   [Glabrezu](#glabrezu)
        -   [Combat](#glabrezu--combat)
    -   [Hezrou](#hezrou)
        -   [Combat](#hezrou--combat)
    -   [Marilith](#marilith)
        -   [Combat](#marilith--combat)
    -   [Nalfeshnee](#nalfeshnee)
        -   [Combat](#nalfeshnee--combat)
    -   [Quasit](#quasit)
        -   [Combat](#quasit--combat)
    -   [Retriever](#retriever)
        -   [Combat](#retriever--combat)
    -   [Succubus](#succubus)
        -   [Combat](#succubus--combat)
    -   [Vrock](#vrock)
        -   [Combat](#vrock--combat)
-   [Derro](#derro)
    -   [Combat](#derro--combat)
-   [Destrachan](#destrachan)
    -   [Combat](#destrachan--combat)
-   [Devil](#devil)
    -   [Barbed Devil (Hamatula)](#barbed-devil)
        -   [Combat](#barbed-devil--combat)
    -   [Bearded Devil (Barbazu)](#bearded-devil)
        -   [Combat](#bearded-devil--combat)
    -   [Bone Devil (Osyluth)](#bone-devil)
        -   [Combat](#bone-devil--combat)
    -   [Chain Devil (Kyton)](#chain-devil)
        -   [Combat](#chain-devil--combat)
    -   [Erinyes](#erinyes)
        -   [Combat](#erinyes--combat)
    -   [Hellcat (Bezekira)](#hellcat)
        -   [Combat](#hellcat--combat)
    -   [Horned Devil (Cornugon)](#horned-devil)
        -   [Combat](#horned-devil--combat)
    -   [Ice Devil (Gelugon)](#ice-devil)
        -   [Combat](#ice-devil--combat)
    -   [Imp](#imp)
        -   [Combat](#imp--combat)
    -   [Lemure](#lemure)
        -   [Combat](#lemure--combat)
    -   [Pit Fiend](#pit-fiend)
        -   [Combat](#pit-fiend--combat)
        -   [Tactics Round-by-Round](#pit-fiend--tactics-round-by-round)
-   [Devourer](#devourer)
    -   [Combat](#devourer--combat)

## Darkmantle

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
                         Small Magical Beast
  Hit Dice:              1d10+1 (6 hp)
  Initiative:            +4
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 30 ft. (poor)
  Armor Class:           17 (+1 size, +6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/+0
  Attack:                Slam +5 melee (1d4+4)
  Full Attack:           Slam +5 melee (1d4+4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Darkness, improved grab, constrict 1d4+4
  Special Qualities:     Blindsight 90 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +2, Will +0
  Abilities:             Str 16, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 10
  Skills:                Hide +10, Listen +5\*, Spot +5\*
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative
  Environment:           Underground
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, clutch (3--9), or swarm (6--15)
  Challenge Rating:      1
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           2--3 HD (Small)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------

The darkmantle hangs from a ceiling by a muscular "foot" at the top of
its body. It can look like a stalactite, by holding its tentacles
stiffly under itself, or like a lump of rock, spreading its tentacles so
the membrane between them covers its body. Its shell and skin usually
resemble limestone, but a darkmantle can change its color to match
almost any type of stony background.

A darkmantle is about 4 feet long from the tips of its tentacles to the
top of its head. It weighs about 30 pounds.

### Combat {#darkmantle--combat}

A darkmantle attacks by dropping onto its prey and wrapping its
tentacles around the opponent's head. Once attached, it squeezes and
tries to suffocate the foe. A darkmantle that misses its initial attack
often flies up and tries to drop on the opponent again.

**Darkness (Su):** Once per day a darkmantle can cause darkness as the
*darkness* spell (caster level 5th). It most often uses this ability
just before attacking.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a darkmantle must hit a
Large or smaller creature with its slam attack. It can then attempt to
start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity.

If it wins the grapple check, it attaches to the opponent's head and can
constrict.

**Constrict (Ex):** A darkmantle deals 1d4+4 points of damage with a
successful grapple check.

**Blindsight (Ex):** A darkmantle can "see" by emitting high-frequency
sounds, inaudible to most other creatures, that allows it to ascertain
objects and creatures within 90 feet. A *silence* spell negates this
ability and effectively blinds the darkmantle.

**Skills:** A darkmantle has a +4 racial bonus on Listen and Spot
checks.

These bonuses are lost if its blindsight is negated. The creature's
variable coloration gives it a +4 racial bonus on Hide checks.

## Delver

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Aberration
  Hit Dice:              15d8+78 (145 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), burrow 10 ft.
  Armor Class:           24 (--2 size, +1 Dex, +15 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 23
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +11/+27
  Attack:                Slam +17 melee (1d6+8 plus 2d6 acid)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +17 melee (1d6+8 plus 2d6 acid)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Corrosive slime
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to acid, stone shape, tremorsense 60 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +12, Ref +6, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 27, Dex 13, Con 21, Int 14, Wis 14, Cha 12
  Skills:                Knowledge (dungeoneering) +14, Knowledge (nature) +4, Listen +20, Move Silently +17, Spot +20, Survival +14 (+16 underground)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Blind-Fight, Great Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Toughness
  Environment:           Underground
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           16--30 HD (Huge); 31--45 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A delver is about 15 feet long and 10 feet wide. It weighs about 6,000
pounds.

Delvers speak Terran and Undercommon.

### Combat {#delver--combat}

A delver prefers to fight from its tunnel, which it uses to protect its
flanks while lashing out with its flippers.

A delver expecting trouble may honeycomb an area with tunnels, leaving
most closed with layers of stone 1 or 2 inches thick.

The delver can quickly dissolve the stone cover and pop up to attack
unexpectedly.

**Corrosive Slime (Ex):** A delver produces a mucuslike slime that
contains a highly corrosive substance. The slime is particularly
effective against stone. A delver's mere touch deals 2d6 points of acid
damage to organic creatures or objects. Against metallic creatures or
objects, a delver's slime deals 4d8 points of damage, and against stony
creatures (including earth elementals) or objects it deals 8d10 points
of damage. A slam attack by a delver leaves a patch of slime that deals
2d6 points of damage on contact and another 2d6 points of damage in each
of the next 2 rounds. A large quantity (at least a quart) of water or
weak acid, such as vinegar, washes off the slime. An opponent's armor
and clothing dissolve and become useless immediately unless the wearer
succeeds on a DC 22 Reflex save. Weapons that strike a delver also
dissolve immediately unless the wielder succeeds on a DC 22 Reflex save.
A creature attacking a delver with natural weapons takes damage from its
slime each time an attack hits unless the creature succeeds on a DC 22
Reflex save. These save DCs are Constitution-based.

**Stone Shape (Ex):** A delver can alter its slime to temporarily soften
stone instead of dissolving it. Once every 10 minutes, a delver can
soften and shape up to 25 cubic feet of stone, as a *stone shape* spell
(caster level 15th).

## Demon

Demons are a race of creatures native to chaotic evil-aligned planes.
They are ferocity personified and will attack any creature just for the
sheer fun of it---even other demons.

Demon Traits: Most demons possess the following traits (unless otherwise
noted in a creature's entry).

---Immunity to electricity and poison.

---Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10.

---*Summon* (Sp): Many demons share the ability to summon others of
their kind (the success chance and type of demon summoned are noted in
each monster description). Demons are often reluctant to use this power
until in obvious peril or extreme circumstances.

---Telepathy.

Except where otherwise noted, demons speak Abyssal, Celestial, and
Draconic.

### Babau

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              7d8+35 (66 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           19 (+1 Dex, +8 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+12
  Attack:                Claw +12 melee (1d6+5)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +12 melee (1d6+5) and bite +7 melee (1d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Sneak attack +2d6, spell-like abilities, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/cold iron or good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, protective slime, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 14, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 16
  Skills:                Climb +15, Disable Device +12, Disguise +13, Escape Artist +11, Hide +19, Listen +19, Move Silently +19, Open Lock +11, Search +20, Sleight of Hand +11, Survival +1 (+3 following tracks), Use Rope +1 (+3 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Multiattack, Power Attack
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or gang (3--6)
  Challenge Rating:      6
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           8--14 HD (Large); 15--21 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A babau is about 6 feet tall and weighs about 140 pounds.

#### Combat {#babau--combat}

Babaus are sneaky and sly. They attack the most powerful foe first,
hoping to eliminate the true threats quickly and then toy with the rest.
When ambushing their opponents, they make excellent use of the
combination of multiple attacks and sneak attacks.

A babau's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated
as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Sneak Attack (Ex):** A babau can make a sneak attack like a rogue,
dealing an extra 2d6 points of damage whenever a foe is denied his or
her Dexterity bonus, or when the babau is flanking.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*darkness, dispel magic, see
invisibility*, *greater teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects only).
Caster level 7th.

**Protective Slime (Su):** A slimy red jelly coats the babau's skin. Any
weapon that touches it takes 1d8 points of acid damage from the
corrosive goo, and the weapon's hardness does not reduce this damage. A
magic weapon may attempt a DC 18 Reflex save to avoid taking this
damage. A creature who strikes the babau with an unarmed attack, unarmed
strike, touch spell, or natural weapon takes this damage as well but can
negate the damage with a DC 18 Reflex save. The save DCs are
Constitution-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):**Once per day a babau can attempt to summon 1
babau with a 40% chance of success. This ability is the equivalent of a
3rd-level spell.

**Skills:** Babaus have a +8 racial bonus on Hide, Listen, Move
Silently, and Search checks.

### Balor

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              20d8+200 (290 hp)
  Initiative:            +11
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), fly 90 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           35 (--1 size, +7 Dex, +19 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 28
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +20/+36
  Attack:                *+1 vorpal longsword* +33 melee (2d6+8/19--20)
  Full Attack:           *+1 vorpal longsword* +31/+26/+21/+16 melee (2d6+8/19--20) and *+1 flaming whip* +30/+25 melee (1d4+4 plus 1d6 fire plus entangle); or 2 slams +31 melee (1d10+7)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft. (20 ft. with *+1 flaming whip*)
  Special Attacks:       Death throes, entangle, spell-like abilities, *summon demon*, vorpal sword
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 15/cold iron and good, darkvision 60 ft., flaming body, immunity to electricity, fire, and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, spell resistance 28, telepathy 100 ft., true seeing
  Saves:                 Fort +22, Ref +19, Will +19
  Abilities:             Str 35, Dex 25, Con 31, Int 24, Wis 24, Cha 26
  Skills:                Bluff +31, Concentration +33, Diplomacy +35, Disguise +8 (+10 acting), Hide +26, Intimidate +33, Knowledge (any two) +30, Listen +38, Move Silently +30, Search +30, Sense Motive +30, Spellcraft +30 (+32 scrolls), Spot +38, Survival +7 (+9 following tracks), Use Magic Device +31 (+33 scrolls)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Improved Initiative, Improved Two-Weapon Fighting, Power Attack, Quicken Spell-Like Ability (*telekinesis*), Two-Weapon Fighting, Weapon Focus (longsword)
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or troupe (1 balor, 1 marilith, and 2--5 hezrous)
  Challenge Rating:      20
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items, plus *+1 vorpal greatsword* and *+1 flaming whip*
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           21--30 HD (Large); 31--60 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A balor stands about 12 feet tall. Its skin is usually dark red. It
weighs about 4,500 pounds.

#### Combat {#balor--combat}

Balors love to join battle armed with their swords and whips. If they
face stiff resistance, they may teleport away to loose a few spell-like
effects at the foe.

A balor's *+1 flaming whip* is a long, flexible weapon with many tails
tipped with hooks, spikes, and balls. The weapon deals bludgeoning and
slashing damage, in addition to fire damage.

A balor's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated
as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Death Throes (Ex):**When killed, a balor explodes in a blinding flash
of light that deals 100 points of damage to anything within 100 feet
(Reflex DC 30 half ). This explosion automatically destroys any weapons
the balor is holding. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Entangle (Ex):** A balor's *+1 flaming whip* entangles foes much like
an attack with a net. The whip has 20 hit points. The whip needs no
folding. If it hits, the target and the balor immediately make opposed
Strength checks; if the balor wins, it drags the target against its
flaming body (see below). The target remains anchored against the
balor's body until it escapes the whip.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will--- *blasphemy* (DC 25), *dominate
monster* (DC 27), *greater dispel magic, greater teleport* (self plus 50
pounds of objects only), *insanity* (DC 25), *power word stun,
telekinesis* (DC 23), *unholy aura* (DC 26); 1/day---*fire storm* (DC
26), *implosion* (DC 27). Caster level 20th. The save DCs are
Charisma-based.

**Vorpal Sword (Su):** Every balor carries a *+1 vorpal longsword* that
looks like a flame or a bolt of lightning.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a balor can automatically summon
4d10 dretches, 1d4 hezrous, or one nalfeshnee, glabrezu, marilith, or
balor. This ability is the equivalent of a 9th-level spell.

**Flaming Body (Su):** The body of a balor is wreathed in flame.

Anyone grappling a balor takes 6d6 points of fire damage each round.

**True Seeing (Su):** Balors have a continuous true seeing ability, as
the spell (caster level 20th).

**Skills:** Balors have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

#### Tactics Round-by-Round {#balor--tactics-round-by-round}

The balor is most effective as a ranged combatant, using its spell-like
abilities to attack from a distance.

Prior to combat: Unholy aura.

*Round 1: Fire storm* or *implosion* and quickened *telekinesis,* or
summon additional demons. If the balor does not deem itself seriously
threatened, it conserves abilities usable only once per day and uses
*blasphemy* instead.

*Round 2: Insanity* or *power word stun.*

*Round 3:* Full melee attack with weapons, including entangle with whip.

*Round 4: Teleport* or fly away with entangled foe to reestablish range;
repeat round 1 and continue.

A balor who wants to drive off or neutralize a party without slaying its
foes avoids lethal attacks.

Prior to combat: Unholy aura.

Round 1: Dominate monster.

Round 2: Power word stun.

*Round 3: Insanity* or *telekinesis* to incapacitate or repel a
dangerous opponent.

*Round 4: Teleport* or fly away to reestablish range; repeat round 1 and
continue.

### Bebilith

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              12d8+96 (150 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), climb 20 ft.
  Armor Class:           22 (--2 size, +1 Dex, +13 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 21
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+29
  Attack:                Bite +19 melee (2d6+9 plus poison) or web +11 ranged
  Full Attack:           Bite +19 melee (2d6+9 plus poison) and 2 claws +14 melee (2d4+4); or web +11 ranged
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison, rend armor, web
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., plane shift, scent, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +16, Ref +9, Will +9
  Abilities:             Str 28, Dex 12, Con 26, Int 11, Wis 13, Cha 13
  Skills:                Climb +24, Diplomacy +3, Hide +16, Jump +28, Listen +16, Move Silently +16, Search +15, Sense Motive +16, Spot +16, Survival +1 (+3 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Improved Initiative, Improved Grapple, Power Attack, Track
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      10
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           13--18 HD (Huge); 19--36 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bebiliths are enormous, predatory, arachnid demons that hunt other
demons. A bebilith has a body the size of a plow horse, with legs
spanning more than 14 feet. It weighs more than two tons.

Bebiliths understand but do not speak Abyssal. Their telepathy allows
them to communicate silently with one another.

### Combat {#demon--combat}

A bebilith attacks any creature it sees. It usually picks one target and
concentrates its attacks on that opponent, using its webs to isolate the
target from its comrades. Should the bebilith become overwhelmed by
tougher opponents, it often attempts to bite one or more of its victims
and retreats, allowing its poison to do its work.

A bebilith's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 24, initial damage 1d6 Con,
secondary damage 2d6 Con. Bebilith venom is highly perishable, losing
its potency and becoming inert, foul-smelling goo almost as soon as it
comes into contact with air. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Rend Armor (Ex):** If a bebilith hits with both claw attacks, it pulls
apart any armor worn by its foe. This attack deals 4d6+18 points of
damage to the opponent's armor. Creatures not wearing armor are
unaffected by this special attack. Armor reduced to 0 hit points is
destroyed. Damaged armor may be repaired with a successful Craft
(armorsmithing) check.

**Web (Ex):** A bebilith can throw a web up to four times per day. This
is similar to an attack with a net but has a maximum range of 30 feet,
with a range increment of 10 feet. This attack is effective against
targets of up to Gargantuan size. The web anchors the target in place,
allowing no movement.

An entangled creature can escape with a DC 24 Escape Artist check or
burst the web with a DC 24 Strength check. The check DCs are
Constitution-based. The web has 14 hit points and hardness 0. There is a
75% chance that the webbing will not burn if any sort of fire is applied
to it (check each round).

**Plane Shift (Su):** This ability affects only the bebilith. It is
otherwise similar to the spell (caster level 12th).

**Skills:** A bebilith has mottled coloration that gives it a +8 racial
bonus on Hide checks.

### Dretch

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Small Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              2d8+4 (13 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares)
  Armor Class:           16 (+1 size, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/--1
  Attack:                Claw +4 melee (1d6+1)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +4 melee (1d6+1) and bite +2 melee (1d4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/cold iron or good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +5, Ref +3, Will +3
  Abilities:             Str 12, Dex 10, Con 14, Int 5, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Hide +9, Listen +5, Move Silently +5, Spot +5, Search +2, Survival +0 (+2 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Multiattack
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, gang (3--5), crowd (6--15), or mob (10--40)
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           3--6 HD (Small)
  Level Adjustment:      +2
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A dretch is about 4 feet tall and weighs about 60 pounds.

Dretches cannot speak but can communicate telepathically.

#### Combat {#dretch--combat}

Dretches are slow, stupid, and not very effective combatants. In
one-on-one combat, they rely on their damage reduction to keep them
alive. In groups, they depend on sheer numbers to overcome foes and
immediately summon other dretches to improve the odds in battle. They
flee at the first sign of adversity unless more powerful demons are
present to intimidate them into fighting. Dretches' fear of their
greater kin is stronger then even their fear of death.

A dretch's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 1/day---*scare* (DC 12), *stinking cloud* (DC
13). Caster level 2nd. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a dretch can attempt to summon
another dretch with a 35% chance of success. This ability is the
equivalent of a 1st-level spell.

**Telepathy (Su):** Dretches can communicate telepathically with
creatures within 100 feet that speak Abyssal.

### Glabrezu

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              12d8+120 (174 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           27 (--2 size, +19 natural) touch 8, flat-footed 27
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+30
  Attack:                Pincers +20 melee (2d8+10)
  Full Attack:           2 pincers +20 melee (2d8+10) and 2 claws +18 melee (1d6+5) and bite +18 melee (1d8+5)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, spell-like abilities, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 21, telepathy 100 ft., true seeing
  Saves:                 Fort +18, Ref +8, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 31, Dex 10, Con 31, Int 16, Wis 16, Cha 20
  Skills:                Bluff +22, Concentration +25, Diplomacy +9, Disguise +5 (+7 acting), Intimidate +24, Knowledge (any two) +18, Listen +26, Move Silently +18, Search +18, Sense Motive +18, Spellcraft +18, Spot +26, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Great Cleave, Multiattack, Persuasive, Power Attack
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or troupe (1 glabrezu, 1 succubus, and 2--5 vrocks)
  Challenge Rating:      13
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           13--18 HD (Huge); 19--36 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Like succubi, glabrezu tempt victims into ruin, but they lure their prey
with power or wealth rather than passion.

Glabrezu have penetrating violet eyes, and their skin color ranges from
deep russet to pitch black. A glabrezu stands about 15 feet tall and
weighs about 5,500 pounds.

#### Combat {#glabrezu--combat}

Glabrezu prefer subterfuge to combat. However, if their attempts to
entice or deceive fail, these enormous demons attack with a vengeance.
They follow a *confusion* attack with melee attacks, hoping to finish
off wounded foes with *chaos hammer* or *unholy blight.*

A glabrezu's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a glabrezu must hit a
Medium or smaller opponent with a pincer attack. It can then attempt to
start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of
opportunity.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*chaos hammer* (DC 19), *confusion*
(DC 19), *dispel magic, mirror image, reverse gravity* (DC 22), *greater
teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects only), *unholy blight* (DC
19); 1/day---*power word stun*. Caster level 14th. The save DCs are
Charisma-based.

Once per month, a glabrezu can fulfill a *wish* for a mortal humanoid.
The demon can use this ability to offer a mortal whatever he or she
desires---but unless the *wish* is used to create pain and suffering in
the world, the glabrezu demands either terrible evil acts or great
sacrifice as compensation.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a glabrezu can attempt to summon
4d10 dretches or 1d2 vrocks with a 50% chance of success, or another
glabrezu with a 20% chance of success. This ability is the equivalent of
a 4th-level spell.

**True Seeing (Su):** Glabrezu continuously use true seeing as the spell
(caster level 14th).

**Skills:** Glabrezu have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

### Hezrou

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              10d8+93 (138 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           23 (--1 size, +14 natural) touch 9, flat-footed 23
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +10/+19
  Attack:                Bite +14 melee (4d4+5)
  Full Attack:           Bite +14 melee (4d4+5) and 2 claws +9 melee (1d8+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, stench, improved grab, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 19, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +16, Ref +7, Will +9
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 10, Con 29, Int 14, Wis 14, Cha 18
  Skills:                Climb +18, Concentration +22, Hide +13, Escape Artist +13, Intimidate +17, Listen +23, Move Silently +13, Search +15, Spellcraft +15, Spot +23, Survival +2 (+4 following tracks), Use Rope +0 (+2 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Cleave, Power Attack, Toughness
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or gang (2--4)
  Challenge Rating:      11
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           11--15 HD (Large); 16--30 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +9
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A hezrou can walk both upright and on all fours, but it always fights
standing up

A hezrou is about 8 feet tall and weighs about 750 pounds.

#### Combat {#hezrou--combat}

Hezrous enjoy melee combat even more than vrocks do. They eagerly press
an attack deep into the heart of enemy forces, so their stench can take
effect as quickly as possible. They enter most battles by using
*blasphemy,* and follow it with an occasional *chaos hammer* or *unholy
blight,* depending on the alignment of their opponents.

A hezrou's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a hezrou must hit with both
claw attacks. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*chaos hammer* (DC 18), *greater
teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects only), *unholy blight* (DC
18); 3/day---*blasphemy* (DC 21), *gaseous form.* Caster level 13th. The
save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Stench (Ex):** A hezrou's skin produces a foul-smelling, toxic liquid
whenever it fights. Any living creature (except other demons) within 10
feet must succeed on a DC 24 Fortitude save or be nauseated for as long
as it remains within the affected area and for 1d4 rounds afterward.
Creatures that successfully save are sickened for as long as they remain
in the area. A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again
by the same hezrou's stench for 24 hours. A *delay poison* or
*neutralize poison* spell removes either condition from one creature.
Creatures that have immunity to poison are unaffected, and creatures
resistant to poison receive their normal bonus on their saving throws..
The save DC is Constitution-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a hezrou can attempt to summon
4d10 dretches or another hezrou with a 35% chance of success. This
ability is the equivalent of a 4th-level spell.

**Skills:** Hezrous have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

### Marilith

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              16d8+144 (216 hp)
  Initiative:            +4
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           29 (--1 size, +4 Dex, +16 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 25
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +16/+29
  Attack:                Longsword +25 melee (2d6+9/19--20) or slam +24 melee (1d8+9) or tail slap +24 melee (4d6+9)
  Full Attack:           Primary longsword +25/+20/+15/+10 melee (2d6+9/19--20) and 5 longswords +25 melee (2d6+4/19--20) and tail slap +22 melee (4d6+4); or 6 slams +24 melee (1d8+9) and tail slap +22 melee (4d6+4)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Constrict 4d6+13, improved grab, spell-like abilities, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good and cold iron, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 25, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +19, Ref +14, Will +14
  Abilities:             Str 29, Dex 19, Con 29, Int 18, Wis 18, Cha 24
  Skills:                Bluff +26, Concentration +28, Diplomacy +30, Disguise +7 (+9 acting), Hide +19, Intimidate +28, Listen +31, Move Silently +23, Search 23, Sense Motive +23, Spellcraft +23 (+25 scrolls), Spot +31, Survival +4 (+6 following tracks), Use Magic Device +26 (+28 scrolls)
  Feats:                 Combat Expertise, Combat Reflexes, Multiattack, Multiweapon Fighting, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (longsword)
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      17
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items, plus 1d4 magic weapons
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           17--20 HD (Large); 21--48 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A marilith usually holds a longsword in each of its six hands and wears
many bangles and jewels.

A marilith stands about 9 feet tall and measures about 20 feet from head
to tip of tail. It weighs about 4,000 pounds.

#### Combat {#marilith--combat}

Though mariliths thrive on grand strategy and army-level tactics, they
love physical combat and never pass up an opportunity to fight. Each of
a marilith's six arms can wield a weapon, and the creature gets an
additional three weapon attacks with its primary arm. Mariliths seldom
rush headlong into battle, however, preferring to hang back and size up
the situation first. They always seek to gain the best possible
advantage from the local terrain, obstacles, and any vulnerability or
weakness in their opponents.

A marilith's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Constrict (Ex):** A marilith deals 4d6+13 points of damage with a
successful grapple check. The constricted creature must succeed on a DC
27 Fortitude save or lose consciousness for as long as it remains in the
coils and for 2d4 rounds thereafter. The save DC is Strength-based.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a marilith must hit with
its tail slap attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it succeeds on the
grapple check, it can constrict.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*align weapon, blade barrier* (DC
23), *magic weapon, project image* (DC 23), *polymorph, see
invisibility, telekinesis* (DC 22), *greater teleport* (self plus 50
pounds of objects only), *unholy aura* (DC 25). Caster level 16th. The
save DCs are Charisma-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a marilith can attempt to summon
4d10 dretches, 1d4 hezrou, or one nalfeshnee with a 50% chance of
success, or one glabrezu or another marilith with a 20% chance of
success. This ability is the equivalent of a 5th-level spell.

**True Seeing (Su):** Mariliths continuously use this ability, as the
spell (caster level 16th).

**Skills:** Mariliths have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

**Feats:** In combination with its natural abilities, a marilith's
Multiweapon Fighting feat allows it to attack with all its arms at no
penalty.

### Nalfeshnee

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              14d8+112 (175 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 40 ft. (poor)
  Armor Class:           27 (--2 size, +1 Dex, +18 natural) touch 9, flat-footed 26
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +14/+29
  Attack:                Bite +20 melee (2d8+7)
  Full Attack:           Bite +20 melee (2d8+7) and 2 claws +17 melee (1d8+3)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Smite, spell-like abilities, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 22, telepathy 100 ft., true seeing
  Saves:                 Fort +17, Ref +10, Will +15
  Abilities:             Str 25, Dex 13, Con 27, Int 22, Wis 22, Cha 20
  Skills:                Bluff +22, Concentration +25, Diplomacy +26, Disguise +5 (+7 acting), Hide +10, Intimidate +22, Knowledge (arcana) +23, Listen +31, Move Silently +18, Search +23, Sense Motive +23, Spellcraft +25 (+27 scrolls), Spot +31, Survival +6 (+8 following tracks), Use Magic Device +22 (+24 scrolls)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Improved Bull Rush, Multiattack, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or troupe (1 nalfeshnee, 1 hezrou, and 2--5 vrocks)
  Challenge Rating:      14
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           15--20 HD (Huge); 21--42 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A nalfeshnee can fly despite its small wings.

A nalfeshnee is more than 20 feet tall and weighs 8,000 pounds.

#### Combat {#nalfeshnee--combat}

When fulfilling their duties in the underworld, nalfeshnees usually
disdain combat as being beneath them. Given the opportunity, they
succumb to blood lust and do battle. They disable opponents with their
smite ability and slaughter them while they can't fight back.

A nalfeshnee's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Smite (Su):** Three times per day a nalfeshnee can create a nimbus of
unholy light. When the demon triggers the ability, rainbow-colored beams
play around its body. One round later they burst in a 60-foot radius.
Any creature within this area must succeed on a DC 22 Will save or be
dazed for 1d10 rounds as visions of its worst fears hound it. The
creature receives its full Dexterity and shield bonuses to AC if
attacked but can take no actions. Other demons are immune to this
effect. The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*call lightning* (DC 18),
*feeblemind* (DC 20), *greater dispel magic, slow* (DC 18), *greater
teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects only), *unholy aura* (DC 23).
Caster level 12th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Twice per day a nalfeshnee can attempt to
summon 1d4 vrocks, 1d4 hezrous, or one glabrezu with a 50% chance of
success, or another nalfeshnee with a 20% chance of success. This
ability is the equivalent of a 5th-level spell.

**True Seeing (Su):** Nalfeshnees continuously use true seeing, as the
spell (caster level 14th).

**Skills:** Nalfeshnees have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot
checks.

### Quasit

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Tiny Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              3d8 (13 hp)
  Initiative:            +7
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (perfect)
  Armor Class:           18 (+2 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/--6
  Attack:                Claw +8 melee (1d3--1 plus poison)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +8 melee (1d3--1 plus poison) and bite +3 melee (1d4--1)
  Space/Reach:           2-1/2 ft./0 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison, spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Alternate form, damage reduction 5/cold iron or good, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 2, immunity to poison, resistance to fire 10
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 8, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Bluff +6, Diplomacy +2, Disguise +0 (+2 acting), Hide +17, Intimidate +2, Knowledge (any one) +6, Listen +7, Move Silently +9, Search +6, Spellcraft +6, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative, Weapon Finesse
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           4--6 HD (Tiny)
  Level Adjustment:      --- (Improved Familiar)
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In its natural form, a quasit stands about 1-1/2 feet tall and weighs
about 8 pounds.

Quasits speak Common and Abyssal.

#### Combat {#quasit--combat}

Although quasits thirst for victory and power as other demons do, they
are cowards at heart. They typically attack from ambush, using their
alternate form ability and *invisibility* to get within reach, then try
to scuttle away. When retreating, they use their *cause fear* ability to
deter pursuit.

A quasit's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 13, initial damage 1d4 Dex,
secondary damage 2d4 Dex. The save DC is Constitution-based and includes
a +2 racial bonus.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*detect good, detect magic,* and
*invisibility* (self only); 1/day---*cause fear* (as the spell, except
that its area is a 30-foot radius from the quasit, save DC 11). Caster
level 6th.

The save DCs are Charisma-based.

Once per week a quasit can use *commune* to ask six questions. The
ability otherwise works as the spell (caster level 12th).

**Alternate Form (Su):** A quasit can assume other forms at will as a
standard action. This ability functions as a *polymorph* spell cast on
itself (caster level 12th), except that a quasit does not regain hit
points for changing form, and any individual quasit can assume only one
or two forms no larger than Medium. Common forms include bat, monstrous
centipede, toad, and wolf. A quasit in alternate form loses its poison
attack.

### Retriever

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Construct (Extraplanar)
  Hit Dice:              10d10+80 (135 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares)
  Armor Class:           21 (--2 size, +3 Dex, +10 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+25
  Attack:                Claw +15 melee (2d6+10) and eye ray +8 ranged touch
  Full Attack:           4 claws +15 melee (2d6+10) and bite +10 melee (1d8+5) and eye ray +8 ranged touch
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Eye rays, *find target,* improved grab
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5, low-light vision
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +3
  Abilities:             Str 31, Dex 17, Con ---, Int ---, Wis 11, Cha 1
  Skills:                ---
  Feats:                 ---
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      11
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           11--15 HD (Huge); 16--30 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A retriever specializes in recovering lost or desired objects, runaway
slaves, and enemies and bringing them back to its master. A retriever
has a body the size of an ox, with legs spanning more than 14 feet. It
weighs about 6,500 pounds.

#### Combat {#retriever--combat}

Retrievers attack with four claws, but their eye rays are far more
deadly.

**Eye Rays (Su):** A retriever's eyes can produce four different magical
rays with a range of 100 feet. Each round, it can fire one ray as a free
action. A particular ray is usable only once every 4 rounds. A retriever
can fire an eye ray in the same round that it makes physical attacks.
The save DC for all rays is 18. The save DC is Dexterity-based.

The four eye effects are:

*Fire:* Deals 12d6 points of fire damage to the target (Reflex half ).

*Cold:* Deals 12d6 points of cold damage to the target (Reflex half ).

*Electricity:* Deals 12d6 points of electricity damage to the target
(Reflex half ).

*Petrification:* The target must succeed on a Fortitude save or turn to
stone permanently.

***Find Target* (Sp):** When ordered to find an item or a creature, a
retriever does so unerringly, as though guided by *discern location.*

The being giving the order must have seen (or must have an item
belonging to) the creature to be found, or must have touched the object
to be located. This ability is the equivalent of an 8th-level spell.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a retriever must hit with
its bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple
check, it establishes a hold and grips the opponent fast in its mouth.
This is the method by which it usually "retrieves" things.

### Succubus

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              6d8+6 (33 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 50 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           20 (+1 Dex, +9 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 19
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+7
  Attack:                Claw +7 melee (1d6+1)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +7 melee (1d6+1)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Energy drain, spell-like abilities, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/cold iron or good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 18, telepathy 100 ft., tongues
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +7
  Abilities:             Str 13, Dex 13, Con 13, Int 16, Wis 14, Cha 26
  Skills:                Bluff +19, Concentration +10, Diplomacy +12, Disguise +17\* (+19 acting), Escape Artist +10, Hide +10, Intimidate +19, Knowledge (any one) +12, Listen +19, Move Silently +10, Search +12, Spot +19, Survival +2 (+4 following tracks), Use Rope +1 (+3 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Dodge, Mobility, Persuasive
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           7--12 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      +6
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A succubus is 6 feet tall in its natural form and weighs about 125
pounds.

#### Combat {#succubus--combat}

Succubi are not warriors. They flee combat whenever they can. If forced
to fight, they can attack with their claws, but they prefer to turn foes
against one another. Succubi use their *polymorph* ability to assume
humanoid guise, and can maintain this deception indefinitely. Their
preferred tactic when dealing with heroes is to feign friendship and
create an opportunity to be alone with one of them, whereupon the
succubus applies her life-draining kiss. Succubi are not above taking on
the role of a damsel in distress when encountered within a dungeon.

A succubus's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Energy Drain (Su):** A succubus drains energy from a mortal it lures
into some act of passion, or by simply planting a kiss on the victim. If
the target is not willing to be kissed, the succubus must start a
grapple, which provokes an attack of opportunity. The succubus's kiss or
embrace bestows one negative level. The kiss also has the effect of a
*suggestion* spell, asking the victim to accept another kiss from the
succubus. The victim must succeed on a DC 21 Will save to negate the
effect of the *suggestion*. The DC is 21 for the Fortitude save to
remove a negative level. These save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*charm monster* (DC 22), *detect
good, detect thoughts* (DC 20), *ethereal jaunt* (self plus 50 pounds of
objects only), *polymorph* (humanoid form only, no limit on duration),
*suggestion* (DC 21), *greater teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects
only). Caster level 12th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a succubus can attempt to summon 1
vrock with a 30% chance of success. This ability is the equivalent of a
3rd-level spell.

**Tongues (Su):** A succubus has a permanent tongues ability (as the
spell, caster level 12th). Succubi usually use verbal communication with
mortals.

**Skills:** Succubi have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

\*While using her *polymorph* ability, a succubus gains a +10
circumstance bonus on Disguise checks.

### Vrock

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Evil)
  Hit Dice:              10d8+70 (115 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 50 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           22 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +11 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 20
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +10/+20
  Attack:                Claw +15 melee (2d6+6)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +15 melee (2d6+6) and bite +13 melee (1d8+3) and 2 talons +13 melee (1d6+3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Dance of ruin, spell-like abilities, spores, stunning screech, *summon demon*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and poison, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and fire 10, spell resistance 17, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +14, Ref +9, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 23, Dex 15, Con 25, Int 14, Wis 16, Cha 16
  Skills:                Concentration +20, Diplomacy +5, Hide +11, Intimidate +16, Knowledge (any one) +15, Listen +24, Move Silently +15, Search +15, Sense Motive +16, Spellcraft +15, Spot +24, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Multiattack, Power Attack
  Environment:           A chaotic evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, gang (3--5), or squad (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           11--14 HD (Large); 15--30 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +8
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A vrock is about 8 feet tall and weighs about 500 pounds.

#### Combat {#vrock--combat}

Vrocks are vicious fighters who like to fly down into the enemy and
cause as much damage as possible. They prance about in battle, taking
briefly to the air and bringing their clawed feet into play. Despite
their advantage in mobility, the vrocks' deep love of battle frequently
leads them into melee combats against heavy odds.

A vrock's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated
as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Dance of Ruin (Su):** To use this ability, a group of at least three
vrocks must join hands in a circle, dancing wildly and chanting.

At the end of 3 rounds of dancing, a wave of crackling energy flashes
outward in a 100-foot radius. All creatures except for demons within the
radius take 20d6 points of damage (Reflex DC 18 half ). Stunning,
paralyzing, or slaying one of the vrocks stops the dance. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*mirror image, telekinesis* (DC 18),
*greater teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects only);
1/day---*heroism.* Caster level 12th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Spores (Ex):** A vrock can release masses of spores from its body once
every 3 rounds as a free action. The spores automatically deal 1d8
points of damage to all creatures adjacent to the vrock. They then
penetrate the skin and grow, dealing an additional 1d4 points of damage
each round for 10 rounds. At the end of this time, the victim is covered
with a tangle of viny growths. (The vines are harmless and wither away
in 1d4 days.) A *delay poison* spell stops the spores' growth for its
duration. *Bless, neutralize poison,* or *remove disease* kills the
spores, as does sprinkling the victim with a vial of holy water.

**Stunning Screech (Su):** Once per hour a vrock can emit a piercing
screech. All creatures except for demons within a 30-foot radius must
succeed on a DC 22 Fortitude save or be stunned for 1 round. The save DC
is Constitution-based.

***Summon Demon* (Sp):** Once per day a vrock can attempt to summon 2d10
dretches or another vrock with a 35% chance of success. This ability is
the equivalent of a 3rd-level spell.

**Skills:** Vrocks have a +8 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

## Derro

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Small Monstrous Humanoid
  Hit Dice:              3d8+3 (16 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares)
  Armor Class:           19 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +2 natural, +3 studded leather armor, +1 buckler), touch 13, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/--1
  Attack:                Short sword +4 melee (1d4/19--20) or repeating light crossbow +6 ranged (1d6/19--20 plus poison)
  Full Attack:           Short sword +4 melee (1d4/19--20) or repeating light crossbow +6 ranged (1d6/19--20 plus poison)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison use, spell-like abilities, sneak attack +1d6
  Special Qualities:     Madness, spell resistance 15 vulnerability to sunlight
  Saves:                 Fort +2, Ref +5, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 11, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 5\*, Cha 16\*
  Skills:                Bluff +5, Hide +10, Listen +1, Move Silently +8
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Improved Initiative
  Environment:           Underground
  Organization:          Team (2--4), squad (5--8 plus 1 3rd-level sorcerer), or band (11--20 plus 30% noncombatants plus 3 3rd-level sorcerers and 1 sorcerer of 5th--8th level)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      --- (+2 if sane)
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Derro are afflicted by a form of racial madness, which most often
manifests as delusions of grandeur coupled with an overpowering urge to
inflict torment on other creatures. Derro are capable of holding their
murderous impulses in check for short periods of time in order to
cooperate with creatures of other races, but such arrangements rarely
last more than a few weeks. Of course, no derro is capable of
recognizing that he is out of his mind.

### Combat {#derro--combat}

Derro are stealthy and bloodthirsty. They like to carefully arrange
cruel traps and deadly ambushes, and strike savagely from hiding. They
delight in taking captives who can be tortured to death later, and favor
traps and poisons that disable without killing.

**Madness (Ex):** Derro use their Charisma modifier on Will saves
instead of their Wisdom modifier, and have immunity to *confusion* and
*insanity* effects. A derro cannot be restored to sanity by any means
short of a *miracle* or *wish* spell.

\*The racial madness of the derro provides a +6 bonus to their Charisma
scores and a --6 penalty to their Wisdom scores. A derro restored to
sanity gains 6 points of Wisdom and loses 6 points of Charisma.

**Poison Use (Ex):** Derro typically carry 2d4 doses of greenblood oil
or Medium monstrous spider venom, applying it to their crossbow bolts.
Derro are not at risk of poisoning themselves when handling poison.

**Sneak Attack (Ex):** Any time a derro's opponent is denied his
Dexterity bonus to AC, or if a derro flanks his opponent, he deals an
extra 1d6 points of damage. This ability is just like the rogue's sneak
attack and subject to the same limitations.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*darkness, ghost sound;* 1/day---
*daze* (DC 13)*, sound burst* (DC 15). Caster level 3rd. The save DCs
are Charisma-based.

**Vulnerability to Sunlight (Ex):** A derro takes 1 point of
Constitution damage for every hour it is exposed to sunlight, and it
dies if its Constitution score reaches 0. Lost Constitution points are
recovered at the rate of 1 per every 24-hour period spent underground or
otherwise sheltered from the sun.

**Skills:** Derro have a +4 racial bonus on Hide and Move Silently
checks.

## Destrachan

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Aberration
  Hit Dice:              8d8+24 (60 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           18 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+14
  Attack:                Claw +9 melee (1d6+4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +9 melee (1d6+4)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Destructive harmonics
  Special Qualities:     Blindsight 100 ft., immunities, protection from sonics
  Saves:                 Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 18, Dex 12, Con 16, Int 12, Wis 18, Cha 12
  Skills:                Hide +8, Listen +25, Move Silently +7, Survival +9
  Feats:                 Dodge, Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes
  Environment:           Underground
  Organization:          Solitary or pack (3--5)
  Challenge Rating:      8
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral evil
  Advancement:           9--16 HD (Large); 17--24 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

The dungeon-dwelling destrachan looks like some bizarre, nonintelligent
beast, but it's an incredibly evil and crafty sadist. A destrachan has a
pair of complex, three-part ears that it can adjust to be more or less
sensitive to various sounds. It is blind, yet hunts with a sense of
hearing more precise than most creatures' sight.

From its tubular mouth a destrachan emits carefully focused harmonics,
producing sonic energy so powerful it can shatter a stone wall. So
skilled is a destrachan at controlling the sounds it emits that it can
choose what type of material to affect with its attack.

A destrachan is about 10 feet long from its mouth to the tip of the tail
and weighs about 4,000 pounds.

A destrachan speaks no language but understands Common. If a destrachan
must communicate, it does so through action.

### Combat {#destrachan--combat}

A destrachan uses its claws only as a last resort or to finish off foes
weakened by its sonic attacks. It often enters battle with surprise if
possible. It first focuses on destroying metal armor and weapons and
then changes to harmonics that disrupt flesh.

**Destructive Harmonics (Su):** A destrachan can blast sonic energy in a
cone up to 80 feet long. It can also use this attack to affect any
creatures or objects within a 30-foot radius. It can tune the harmonics
of this destructive power to affect different types of targets. All save
DCs are Charisma-based.

*Flesh:* Disrupting tissue and rending bone, this attack deals 4d6
points of damage to all within the area (Reflex DC 15 half ).

*Nerves:* A destrachan can focus its harmonics to knock out foes rather
than slay them. This attack deals 6d6 points of nonlethal damage to all
within the area (Reflex DC 15 half ).

*Material:* When using this form of harmonics, a destrachan chooses
wood, stone, metal, or glass. All objects made of that material within
the area must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or shatter. Objects (or
portions of objects) that have up to 30 hit points are potentially
affected by this attack.

**Blindsight (Ex):** A destrachan can use hearing to ascertain all foes
within 100 feet as a sighted creature would.

**Immunities:** Destrachans have immunity to gaze attacks, visual
effects, illusions, and other attack forms that rely on sight.

**Protection from Sonics (Ex):** While they can be affected by loud
noises and sonic spells (such as *ghost sound* or *silence*),
destrachans are less vulnerable to sonic attacks (+4 circumstance bonus
on all saves) because they can protect their ears. A destrachan whose
sense of hearing is impaired is effectively blinded, and all targets are
treated as having total concealment.

**Skills:** A destrachan has a +10 racial bonus on Listen checks.

## Devil

Devils are fiends from lawful evil-aligned planes.

Many devils are surrounded by a fear aura, which they use to break up
powerful groups and defeat opponents piecemeal. Devils with spell-like
abilities use their illusion abilities to delude and confuse foes as
much as possible. A favorite trick is to create illusory reinforcements;
enemies can never be entirely sure if a threat is only a figment or real
summoned devils joining the fray.

**Devil Traits:** Most devils possesses the following traits (unless
otherwise noted in a creature's entry).

---Immunity to fire and poison.

---Resistance to acid 10 and cold 10.

---See in Darkness (Su): Some devils can see perfectly in darkness of
any kind, even that created by a *deeper darkness* spell.

---*Summon* (Sp): Some devils share the ability to summon others of
their kind (the success chance and type of devils summoned are noted in
each monster description).

---Telepathy.

Except when otherwise noted, devils speak Infernal, Celestial, and
Draconic.

### Barbed Devil (Hamatula) {#barbed-devil}

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              12d8+72 (126 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           29 (+6 Dex, +13 natural) touch 16, flat-footed 23
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+22
  Attack:                Claw +18 melee (2d8+6 plus fear)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +18 melee (2d8+6 plus fear)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Fear, improved grab, impale 3d8+9, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Barbed defense, damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, see in darkness, spell resistance 23, spell-like abilities, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +14, Ref +14, Will +12
  Abilities:             Str 23, Dex 23, Con 23, Int 12, Wis 14, Cha 18
  Skills:                Concentration +21, Diplomacy +6, Hide +21, Intimidate +19, Knowledge (any one) +16, Listen +19, Move Silently +21, Search +16, Sense Motive +17, Spot +19, Survival +2 (+4 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Cleave, Improved Grapple, Iron Will, Power Attack
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, team (3--5), or squad (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      11
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           13--24 (Medium); 25--36 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A barbed devil is about 7 feet tall and weighs about 300 pounds.

#### Combat {#barbed-devil--combat}

Barbed devils eagerly fight with their claws, trying to impale their
opponents. They use *hold person* to immobilize those who avoid their
hug attacks.

A barbed devil's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Fear (Su):** A creature hit by a barbed devil must succeed on a DC 20
Will save or be affected as though by *fear* (caster level 9th).

Whether or not the save is successful, that creature cannot be affected
by that same barbed devil's fear ability for 24 hours. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Impale (Ex):** A barbed devil deals 3d8+9 points of piercing damage to
a grabbed opponent with a successful grapple check.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a barbed devil must hit
with a claw attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the
grapple check, it establishes a hold and can impale the opponent on its
barbed body.

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Once per day a barbed devil can attempt to
summon 1d6 bearded devils or another barbed devil with a 35% chance of
success. This ability is the equivalent of a 4th-level spell.

**Barbed Defense (Su):** Any creature striking a barbed devil with
handheld weapons or natural weapons takes 1d8+6 points of piercing and
slashing damage from the devil's barbs. Note that weapons with
exceptional reach, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in
this way.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*greater teleport* (self plus 50
pounds of objects only), *hold person* (DC 16), *major image* (DC 17),
*scorching ray* (2 rays only). 1/day---*order's wrath* (DC 18), *unholy
blight* (DC 18). Caster level 12th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

### Bearded Devil (Barbazu) {#bearded-devil}

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              6d8+18 (45 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           19 (+2 Dex, +7 natural) touch 12, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+8
  Attack:                Glaive +9 melee (1d10+3 plus infernal wound) or claw +8 melee (1d6+2)
  Full Attack:           Glaive +9/+4 melee (1d10+3 plus infernal wound) or 2 claws +8 melee (1d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft. (10 ft. with glaive)
  Special Attacks:       Infernal wound, beard, battle frenzy, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/silver or good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, see in darkness, spell resistance 17, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +8, Ref +7, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 15, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 10
  Skills:                Climb +11, Diplomacy +2, Hide +11, Listen +9, Move Silently +9, Sense Motive +9, Spot +9
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (glaive)
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, team (3--5), or squad (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      5
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           7--9 HD (Medium); 10--18 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      +6
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Every bearded devil carries a sawtoothed glaive.

A bearded devil stands 6 feet tall and weighs about 225 pounds.

#### Combat {#bearded-devil--combat}

Bearded devils are aggressive and love to fight. They revel in their
battle frenzy, spreading mayhem among their foes.

A bearded devil's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will--- *greater teleport* (self plus 50
pounds of objects only). Caster level 12th.

**Infernal Wound (Su):** The damage a bearded devil deals with its
glaive causes a persistent wound. An injured creature loses 2 additional
hit points each round. The wound does not heal naturally and resists
healing spells. The continuing hit point loss can be stopped by a DC 16
Heal check, a *cure* spell, or a *heal* spell. However, a character
attempting to cast a *cure* spell or a *heal* spell on a creature
damaged by a bearded devil's glaive must succeed on a DC 16 caster level
check, or the spell has no effect on the injured character.

A successful Heal check automatically stops the continuing hit point
loss as well as restoring hit points. The infernal wound is a
supernatural ability of the bearded devil, not of the weapon. The check
DC is Constitution-based.

**Beard (Ex):** If a bearded devil hits a single opponent with both claw
attacks, it automatically hits with its beard. The affected creature
takes 1d8+2 points of damage and must succeed on a DC 16 Fortitude save
or be infected with a vile disease known as devil chills (incubation
period 1d4 days, damage 1d4 Str). Damage is dealt each day until the
afflicted creature succeeds on three consecutive Fortitude saves, the
disease is cured magically, or the creature dies. The save DC is
Constitution-based.

**Battle Frenzy (Ex):** Twice per day, a bearded devil can work itself
into a battle frenzy similar to the barbarian's rage (+4 Strength, +4
Constitution, +2 morale bonus on Will saves, --2 AC penalty). The frenzy
lasts for 6 rounds, and the bearded devil suffers no ill effects
afterward.

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Once per day a bearded devil can attempt to
summon 2d10 lemures with a 50% chance of success, or another bearded
devil with a 35% chance of success. This ability is the equivalent of a
3rd-level spell.

### Bone Devil (Osyluth) {#bone-devil}

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              10d8+50 (95 hp)
  Initiative:            +9
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           25 (--1 size, +5 Dex, +11 natural) touch 14, flat-footed 20
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +10/+19
  Attack:                Bite +14 melee (1d8+5)
  Full Attack:           Bite +14 melee (1d8+5) and 2 claws +12 melee (1d4+2) and sting +12 melee (3d4+2 plus poison)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, fear aura, poison, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, see in darkness, spell resistance 21, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +12, Ref +12, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 21, Con 21, Int 14, Wis 14, Cha 14
  Skills:                Bluff +15, Concentration +18, Diplomacy +6, Disguise +2 (+4 acting), Hide +14, Intimidate +17, Knowledge (any one) +15, Listen +17, Move Silently +18, Search +15, Sense Motive +15, Spot +17, Survival +2 (+4 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Multiattack
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, team (2--4), or squad (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           11--20 HD (Large); 21--30 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bone devils stand about 9 feet tall and weigh about 500 pounds.

#### Combat {#bone-devil--combat}

Bone devils hate all other creatures and attack ruthlessly. They freely
use *wall of ice* to keep the enemy divided.

A bone devil's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Fear Aura (Su):** Bone devils can radiate a 5-foot-radius fear aura as
a free action. Affected creatures must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or
be affected as though by a *fear* spell (caster level 7th). A creature
that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same bone
devil's aura for 24 hours. Other devils are immune to the aura. The save
DC is Charisma-based.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 20, initial damage 1d6 Str,
secondary damage 2d6 Str. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*greater teleport* (self plus 50
pounds of objects only), *dimensional anchor, fly, invisibility* (self
only), *major image* (DC 15), *wall of ice*. Caster level 12th. The save
DC is Charisma-based.

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Once per day a bone devil can attempt to summon
2d10 lemures with a 50% chance of success, or another bone devil with a
35% chance of success. This ability is the equivalent of a 4th-level
spell.

### Chain Devil (Kyton) {#chain-devil}

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              8d8+16 (52 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           20 (+2 Dex, +8 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +8/+10
  Attack:                Chain +10 melee (2d4+2/19--20)
  Full Attack:           2 chains +10 melee (2d4+2/19--20)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft. (10 ft. with chains)
  Special Attacks:       Dancing chains, unnerving gaze
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/silver or good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to cold, regeneration 2, spell resistance 18
  Saves:                 Fort +8, Ref +8, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 15, Dex 15, Con 15, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 12
  Skills:                Climb +13, Craft (blacksmithing) +17, Escape Artist +13, Intimidate +12, Listen +13, Spot +13, Use Rope +2 (+4 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Critical (chain), Improved Initiative
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, gang (2--4), band (6--10), or mob (11--20)
  Challenge Rating:      6
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           9--16 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      +6
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kytons are humanlike devils, wrapped in chains instead of clothing. A
chain devil is 6 feet tall and weighs about 300 pounds, chains included.

Chain devils speak Infernal and Common.

#### Combat {#chain-devil--combat}

A chain devil attacks by flailing away with the spiked chains that serve
as its clothing, armor, and weapons.

A chain devil's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Dancing Chains (Su):** A chain devil's most awesome attack is its
ability to control up to four chains within 20 feet as a standard
action, making the chains dance or move as it wishes. In addition, a
chain devil can increase these chains' length by up to 15 feet and cause
them to sprout razor-edged barbs. These chains attack as effectively as
the devil itself. If a chain is in another creature's possession, the
creature can attempt a DC 15 Will save to break the chain devil's power
over that chain. If the save is successful, the kyton cannot attempt to
control that particular chain again for 24 hours or until the chain
leaves the creature's possession. The save DC is Charisma-based.

A chain devil can climb chains it controls at its normal speed without
making Climb checks.

**Unnerving Gaze (Su):** Range 30 ft., Will DC 15 negates. A chain devil
can make its face resemble one of an opponent's departed loved ones or
bitter enemies. Those who fail their saves take a --2 penalty on attack
rolls for 1d3 rounds. The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Regeneration (Ex):** Chain devils take normal damage from silvered
weapons, good-aligned weapons, and spells or effects with the good
descriptor. A chain devil that loses a piece of its body regrows it in
2d6x10 minutes. Holding the severed member against the stump enables it
to reattach instantly.

**Skills:** Chain devils have a +8 racial bonus on Craft checks
involving metalwork.

### Erinyes

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              9d8+45 (85 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 50 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           23 (+5 Dex, +8 natural) touch 15, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +9/+14
  Attack:                Longsword +14 melee (1d8+5/19--20) or *+1 flaming composite longbow* (+5 Str bonus) +15 ranged (1d8+6/x3 plus 1d6 fire) or rope +14 ranged (entangle)
  Full Attack:           Longsword +14/+9 melee (1d8+5/19--20) or *+1 flaming composite longbow* (+5 Str bonus) +15/+10 ranged (1d8+6/x3 plus 1d6 fire) or rope +14 ranged (entangle)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Entangle, spell-like abilities, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, see in darkness, spell resistance 20, telepathy 100 ft., true seeing
  Saves:                 Fort +11, Ref +11, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 21, Con 21, Int 14, Wis 18, Cha 20
  Skills:                Concentration +17, Diplomacy +7, Escape Artist +17, Hide +17, Knowledge (any two) +14, Listen +16, Move Silently +17, Search +14, Sense Motive +16, Spot +16, Survival +4 (+6 following tracks), Use Rope +5 (+7 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Dodge^B^, Mobility^B^, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, Rapid Shot, Shot on the Run
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      8
  Treasure:              Standard, plus rope and *+1 flaming composite longbow* (+5 Str bonus)
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           10--18 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      +7
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Unlike other devils, erinyes appear attractive to humans, resembling
very comely women or men. An erinyes stands about 6 feet tall and weighs
about 150 pounds.

Erinyes speak Infernal, Celestial, and Draconic.

#### Combat {#erinyes--combat}

Erinyes prefer to engage in combat from a distance. They use *charm
monster* to distract or disorganize their opponents, then rain down
fiery arrows from above.

An erinyes's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Entangle (Ex):** Each erinyes carries a stout rope some 50 feet long
that entangles opponents of any size as an *animate rope* spell (caster
level 16th). An erinyes can hurl its rope 30 feet with no range penalty.
Typically, an erinyes entangles a foe, lifts it into the air, and drops
it from a great height.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*greater teleport* (self plus 50
pounds of objects only), *charm monster* (DC 19), *minor image* (DC 17),
*unholy blight* (DC 19). Caster level 12th. The save DCs are
Charisma-based.

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Once per day an erinyes can attempt to summon
2d10 lemures or 1d4 bearded devils with a 50% chance of success. This
ability is the equivalent of a 3rd-level spell.

**True Seeing (Su):** Erinyes continuously use true seeing, as the spell
(caster level 14th).

### Hellcat (Bezekira) {#hellcat}

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              8d8+24 (60 hp)
  Initiative:            +9
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           21 (--1 size, +5 Dex, +7 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +8/+18
  Attack:                Claw +13 melee (1d8+6)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +13 melee (1d8+6) and bite +8 melee (2d8+3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, pounce, rake 1d8+3
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/good, darkvision 60 ft., invisible in light, resistance to fire 10, scent, spell resistance 19, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +11, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 23, Dex 21, Con 17, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 10
  Skills:                Balance +16, Climb +17, Hide +13, Jump +21, Listen +17, Move Silently +20, Spot +13, Swim +17
  Feats:                 Dodge, Improved Initiative, Track
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or pride (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           9--10 HD (Large); 11--24 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

While its appearance suggests it is incorporeal, a hellcats has a
corporeal body and can be harmed by physical attacks.

Hellcats use a natural telepathy to communicate with one another and
those they encounter. A hellcat measures about 9 feet long and weighs
about 900 pounds.

#### Combat {#hellcat--combat}

A hellcat can hold its own in combat thanks to sharp claws and wicked
fangs. It prefers to leap upon opponents, just as a lion does.

A hellcat's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a hellcat must hit with its
bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple
check, it establishes a hold and can rake.

**Pounce (Ex):** If a hellcat charges, it can make a full attack,
including two rake attacks.

**Rake (Ex):** Attack bonus +13 melee, damage 1d8+3.

**Invisible in Light (Ex):** A hellcat is invisible in any area lit well
enough for a human to see. In a darkened area, it shows up as a faintly
glowing outline visible up to 30 feet away (60 feet if the viewer has
low-light vision). Magical darkness smothers the glow and conceals the
outline.

**Skills:** Hellcats have a +4 racial bonus on Listen and Move Silently
checks.

### Horned Devil (Cornugon) {#horned-devil}

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              15d8+105 (172 hp)
  Initiative:            +7
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           35 (--1 size, +7 Dex, +19 natural) touch 16, flat-footed 28
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +15/+29
  Attack:                Spiked chain +25 melee (2d6+15 plus stun) or claw +24 melee (2d6+10) or tail +24 melee (2d6+10 plus infernal wound)
  Full Attack:           Spiked chain +25/+20/+15 melee (2d6+15 plus stun) and bite +22 melee (2d8+5) and tail +22 melee (2d6+5 plus infernal wound); or 2 claws +24 melee (2d6+10) and bite + 22 melee (2d8+5) and tail +22 melee (2d6+5 plus infernal wound)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft. (20 ft. with spiked chain)
  Special Attacks:       Fear aura, infernal wound, spell-like abilities, stun, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good and silver, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, regeneration 5, see in darkness, spell resistance 28, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +16, Ref +16, Will +15
  Abilities:             Str 31, Dex 25, Con 25, Int 14, Wis 18, Cha 22
  Skills:                Bluff +24, Climb +28, Concentration +24, Diplomacy +10, Disguise +6 (+8 acting), Hide +21, Intimidate +26, Listen +22, Move Silently +23, Search +20, Sense Motive +22, Spot +22, Survival +4 (+6 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Improved Sunder, Iron Will, Multiattack, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (spiked chain)
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, team (2--4), or squad (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      16
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           16--20 HD (Large); 21--45 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A horned devil is 9 feet tall and weighs about 600 pounds.

#### Combat {#horned-devil--combat}

Horned devils are bold fighters. They rarely retreat, even against
overwhelming odds. They love to fight with their spiked chains, usually
singling out the most powerful foes to stun and eliminate quickly.

A horned devil's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*dispel chaos* (DC 21), *dispel
good* (DC 21), *magic circle against good, greater teleport* (self plus
50 pounds of objects only); *persistent image* (DC 21)
3/day---*fireball* (DC 19), *lightning bolt* (DC 19). Caster level 15th.
The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Fear Aura (Su):** A horned devil can radiate a 5-foot-radius fear aura
as a free action. A creature in the area must succeed on a DC 23 Will
save or be affected as though by a *fear* spell (caster level 15th). A
creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same
horned devil's aura for 24 hours. Other devils are immune to the aura.
The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Stun (Su):** Whenever a horned devil hits with a spiked chain attack,
the opponent must succeed on a DC 27 Fortitude save or be stunned for
1d4 rounds. The save DC is Strength-based. This ability is a function of
the horned devil, not of the spiked chain.

**Infernal Wound (Su):** The damage a horned devil deals with its tail
attack causes a persistent wound. An injured creature loses 2 additional
hit points each round. The wound does not heal naturally and resists
healing spells. The continuing hit point loss can be stopped by a DC 24
Heal check, a *cure* spell, or a *heal* spell. However, a character
attempting to cast a *cure* spell or a *heal* spell on a creature
damaged by a horned devil's tail must succeed on a DC 24 caster level
check, or the spell has no effect on the injured character. A successful
Heal check automatically stops the continuing hit point loss as well as
restoring hit points. The check DC is Constitution-based.

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Once per day a horned devil can attempt to
summon 2d10 lemures or 1d6 bearded devils with a 50% chance of success,
1d6 barbed devils with a 35% chance of success, or another horned devil
with a 20% chance of success. This ability is the equivalent of a
6th-level spell.

**Regeneration (Ex):** A horned devil takes normal damage from
good-aligned silvered weapons, and from spells or effects with the good
descriptor.

### Ice Devil (Gelugon) {#ice-devil}

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              14d8+84 (147 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           32 (--1 size, +5 Dex, +18 natural) touch 14, flat-footed 27
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +14/+24
  Attack:                Spear +20 melee (2d6+9/x3 plus slow) or claw +19 melee (1d10+6)
  Full Attack:           Spear +20/+15/+10 melee (2d6+9/x3 plus slow) and bite +14 melee (2d6+3) and tail +14 melee (3d6+3 plus slow); or 2 claws +19 melee (1d10+6) and bite +14 melee (2d6+3) and tail +14 melee (3d6+3 plus slow)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Fear aura, slow, spell-like abilities, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/good, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, regeneration 5, see in darkness, spell resistance 25, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +15, Ref +14, Will +15
  Abilities:             Str 23, Dex 21, Con 23, Int 22, Wis 22, Cha 20
  Skills:                Bluff +22, Climb +23, Concentration +23, Diplomacy +9, Disguise +5 (+7 acting), Intimidate +24, Jump +27, Knowledge (any three) +23, Listen +25, Move Silently +22, Search +23, Sense Motive +23, Spellcraft +23, Spot +25, Survival +6 (+8 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (spear)
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, team (2--4), squad (6--10), or troupe (1--2 ice devils, 7--12 bearded devils, and 1--4 bone devils)
  Challenge Rating:      13
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           15--28 HD (Large); 29--42 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An ice devil is about 12 feet tall and weighs about 700 pounds.

#### Combat {#ice-devil--combat}

An ice devil prefers to fight only when doing so serves its mission, but
it never hesitates to attack when it deems a battle necessary---or
likely to end in its victory.

An ice devil's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Fear Aura (Su):** An ice devil can radiate a 10-foot-radius fear aura
as a free action. A creature in the area must succeed on a DC 22 Will
save or be affected as though by a *fear* spell (caster level 13th). A
creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same
ice devil's aura for 24 hours. Other devils are immune to the aura. The
save DC is Charisma-based.

**Slow (Su):** A hit from an ice devil's tail or spear induces numbing
cold. The opponent must succeed on a DC 23 Fortitude save or be affected
as though by a *slow* spell for 1d6 rounds. The save DC is
Constitution-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*cone of cold* (DC 20), *fly, ice
storm* (DC 19), *greater teleport* (self plus 50 pounds of objects
only), *persistent image* (DC 20), *unholy aura* (DC 23), *wall of ice*
(DC 19). Caster level 13th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Once per day an ice devil can attempt to summon
2d10 lemures or 1d6 bearded devils, 2d4 bone devils with a 50% chance of
success, or another ice devil with a 20% chance of success. This ability
is the equivalent of a 4th-level spell.

**Regeneration (Ex):** An ice devil takes normal damage from
good-aligned weapons and from spells or effects with the good
descriptor.

### Imp

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Tiny Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              3d8 (13 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (perfect)
  Armor Class:           20 (+2 size, +3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/--5
  Attack:                Sting +8 melee (1d4 plus poison)
  Full Attack:           Sting +8 melee (1d4 plus poison)
  Space/Reach:           2-1/2 ft./0 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison, spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Alternate form, damage reduction 5/good or silver, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 2, immunity to poison, resistance to fire 5
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +6, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 14
  Skills:                Diplomacy +8, Hide +17, Knowledge (any one) +6, Listen +7, Move Silently +9, Search +6, Spellcraft +6, Spot +7, Survival +1 (+3 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Dodge, Weapon Finesse
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           4--6 HD (Tiny)
  Level Adjustment:      --- (Improved Familiar)
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In its natural form, an imp stands almost 2 feet tall and weighs about 8
pounds.

#### Combat {#imp--combat}

Imps are craven, but not so timid as to pass up an opportunity for a
surprise attack using their *invisibility* and alternate form ability.
In its natural form, an imp attacks with the wicked stinger on its tail.
It quickly flies out of reach if a foe manages to strike back
effectively.

An imp's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated
as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 13, initial damage 1d4 Dex,
secondary damage 2d4 Dex. The save DC is Constitution-based and includes
a +2 racial bonus.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*detect good, detect magic,
invisibility* (self only); 1/day---*suggestion* (DC 15). Caster level
6th. The save DC is Charisma-based.

Once per week an imp can use *commune* to ask six questions. The ability
otherwise works as the spell (caster level 12th).

**Alternate Form (Su):** An imp can assume other forms at will as a
standard action. This ability functions as a *polymorph* spell cast on
itself (caster level 12th), except that an imp does not regain hit
points for changing form, and an individual imp can assume only one or
two forms no larger than Medium. Common forms include monstrous spider,
raven, rat, and boar.

### Lemure

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              2d8 (9 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares)
  Armor Class:           14 (+4 natural) touch 10, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/+2
  Attack:                Claw +2 melee (1d4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +2 melee (1d4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/good or silver, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, mindless, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, mindless, see in darkness
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +3
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 10, Con 10, Int ---, Wis 11, Cha 5
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, gang (3--5), swarm (6--15), or mob (10--40)
  Challenge Rating:      1
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           3--6 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A lemure is about 5 feet tall and weighs about 100 pounds.

Lemures are mindless and cannot communicate, but they are sensitive to
telepathic messages from other devils, typically obeying a devil's
mental commands.

#### Combat {#lemure--combat}

Lemures surge toward anything they meet and try to claw it apart. Only a
telepathic command from other devils or the complete destruction of the
lemures can make them stop.

A lemure's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Mindless (Ex):** Immunity to mind-affecting effects (charms,
compulsions, phantasms, patterns, and morale effects).

### Pit Fiend

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              18d8+144 (225 hp)
  Initiative:            +12
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), fly 60 ft. (average)
  AC:                    40 (--1 size, +8 Dex, +23 natural) touch 17, flat-footed 32
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +18/+35
  Attack:                Claw +30 melee (2d8+13)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +30 melee (2d8+13) and 2 wings +28 melee (2d6+6) and bite +28 melee (4d6+6 plus poison plus disease) and tail slap +28 melee (2d8+6)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Constrict 2d8+26, fear aura, improved grab, spell-like abilities, *summon devil*
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 15/good and silver, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire and poison, resistance to acid 10 and cold 10, regeneration 5, see in darkness, spell resistance 32, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +19, Ref +19, Will +21
  Abilities:             Str 37, Dex 27, Con 27, Int 26, Wis 26, Cha 26
  Skills:                Balance +10, Bluff +29, Climb +34, Concentration +29, Diplomacy +10, Disguise +29 (+31 acting), Hide +25, Intimidate +31, Jump +40, Knowledge (arcana) +29, Knowledge (nature) +10, Knowledge (the planes) +29, Knowledge (religion) +29, Listen +29, Move Silently +29, Search +29, Spellcraft +31, Spot +29, Survival +8 (+10 on other planes, +10 when tracking), Tumble +31
  Feats:                 Cleave, Great Cleave, Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Multiattack, Power Attack, Quicken Spell-Like Ability (*fireball*)
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, team (3--4), or troupe (1--2 pit fiends, 2--5 horned devils, and 2--5 barbed devils)
  Challenge Rating:      20
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           19--36 HD (Large); 37--54 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A pit fiend often wraps its wings around itself like a grotesque cloak,
and appears wreathed in flames.

A pit fiend is 12 feet tall and weighs 800 pounds.

#### Combat {#pit-fiend--combat}

Pit fiends are wily and resourceful fighters, using *invisibility* to
gain the upper hand and biting at foes seemingly able to see them. They
don't hesitate to blanket an area with *fireballs*, and can call down
the wrath of an inferno with *meteor swarm.*

A pit fiend's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Constrict (Ex):** A pit fiend deals 2d8+26 points of damage with a
successful grapple check.

**Disease (Su):** A creature struck by a pit fiend's bite attack must
succeed on a DC 27 Fortitude save or be infected with a vile disease
known as devil chills (incubation period 1d4 days, damage 1d4 Str). The
save DC is Constitution-based.

**Fear Aura (Su):** A pit fiend can radiate a 20-foot-radius fear aura
as a free action. A creature in the area must succeed on a DC 27 Will
save or be affected as though by a *fear* spell (caster level 18th). A
creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same
pit fiend's aura for 24 hours. Other devils are immune to the aura. The
save DC is Charisma-based.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, a pit fiend must hit with
its tail slap attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free
action without provoking an attack of opportunity.

If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 27, initial damage 1d6 Con,
secondary damage death. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*blasphemy* (DC 25), *create undead,
fireball* (DC 21), *greater dispel magic, greater teleport* (self plus
50 pounds of objects only), *invisibility, magic circle against good,
mass hold monster* (DC 27), *persistent image* (DC 23), *power word
stun, unholy aura* (DC 26); 1/day---*meteor swarm* (DC 27). Caster level
18th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

Once per year a pit fiend can use *wish* as the spell (caster level
20th).

***Summon Devil* (Sp):** Twice per day a pit fiend can automatically
summon 2 lemures, bone devils, or bearded devils, or 1 erinyes, horned
devil, or ice devil. This ability is the equivalent of an 8th-level
spell.

**Regeneration (Ex):** A pit fiend takes normal damage from good-aligned
silvered weapons, and from spells or effects with the good descriptor.

#### Tactics Round-by-Round {#pit-fiend--tactics-round-by-round}

A pit fiend typically opens combat by using its spell-like abilities,
attempting to neutralize dangerous opponents before entering melee.

*Prior to combat: Unholy aura*; activate fear aura, *summon devil*.

*Round 1:* Quickened *fireball* and *mass hold monster* if facing three
or more visible, active opponents; otherwise *power word stun* against
unarmored opponent (preferably a spellcaster).

*Round 2: Meteor swarm* against as many foes as possible, approach
worst-injured enemy.

*Round 3:* Full attack against injured enemy.

*Round 4:* Continue melee against injured enemy, or *power word stun*
against annoying spellcaster.

*Round 5:* Repeat from round 1, or *greater teleport* to safety if
endangered.

## Devourer

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Undead (Extraplanar)
  Hit Dice:              12d12 (78 hp)
  Initiative:            +4
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           24 (--1 size, +15 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 24
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+19
  Attack:                Claw +15 melee (1d6+9)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +15 melee (1d6+9)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Energy drain, trap essence, spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., spell deflection, spell resistance 21, undead traits
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 28, Dex 10, Con ---, Int 16, Wis 16, Cha 17
  Skills:                Climb +24, Concentration +18, Diplomacy +5, Jump +24, Listen +18, Move Silently +15, Search +10, Sense Motive +11, Spot +18, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Combat Casting, Combat Expertise, Improved Initiative, Weapon Focus (claw)
  Environment:           Any
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      11
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral evil
  Advancement:           13--24 HD (Large); 25--36 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Devourers lurk on the Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane, stalking both
natives and travelers with equal sadistic glee.

A devourer is about 9 feet tall and weighs 500 pounds.

Devourers speak Common.

### Combat {#devourer--combat}

Even if it had no special abilities, a devourer would be a terrible
opponent, for its bony claws can flay enemies alive.

**Energy Drain (Su):** Living creatures hit by a devourer's claw attack
or *spectral hand* ability gain one negative level. The DC is 19 for the
Fortitude save to remove a negative level. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Trap Essence (Su):** The devourer is named for its ability to consume
an enemy's life essence. To do so, it must forgo its normal melee
attacks and make a trap essence attack. This requires a normal attack
roll but deals no damage. The he save DC is Charisma-based. A slain
creature's essence is trapped within the devourer's ribs, and the tiny
figure takes on that victim's features. The trapped essence cannot be
raised or resurrected, but a *limited wish, miracle,* or *wish* spell
frees it, as does destroying the devourer. A devourer can hold only one
essence at a time.

The trapped essence provides a devourer with enough power to use five
spell-like abilities for each Hit Die or level of the trapped creature.
As this energy is expended, the twisted soul fades away until it
evaporates completely. The trapped essence gains one negative level for
every five times the devourer uses one of its spell-like abilities. When
the essence's number of negative levels equals the creature's total Hit
Dice or level, the essence is destroyed. If an essence is freed, the
restored creature must succeed on a DC 19 Fortitude save for each
negative level or lose that level permanently.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At the start of any encounter, the trapped
essence within a devourer is assumed to have 3d4+3 levels (enough fuel
for thirty to seventy-five uses). Once per round, a devourer can use one
of the following abilities: *confusion* (DC 17), *control undead* (DC
20), *ghoul touch* (DC 15), *lesser planar ally, ray of enfeeblement*
(DC 14), *spectral hand, suggestion* (DC 16), *true seeing*. Caster
level 18th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Spell Deflection (Su):** The trapped essence provides a measure of
magical protection. If any of the following spells are cast at the
devourer and overcome its spell resistance, they affect the imprisoned
essence instead: *banishment, chaos hammer, confusion, crushing despair,
detect thoughts, dispel evil, dominate person, fear, geas/quest, holy
word, hypnosis, imprisonment, magic jar, maze, suggestion, trap the
soul,* or any form of charm or compulsion. In many cases, this
deflection effectively neutralizes the spell. Some of these effects
might eliminate the trapped essence, depriving the devourer of its
spell-like abilities until it can consume another victim.
