# MONSTERS (INTRO-A)

## Reading the Entries

Each monster description is organized in the same general format, as
outlined below.

### Statistics Block

This portion of a monster description contains basic game information on
the creature.

#### Name

This is the name by which the creature is generally known. The
descriptive text may provide other names.

#### Size and Type

This line describes the creature's size. A size modifier applies to the
creature's Armor Class (AC) and attack bonus, as well as to certain
skills. A creature's size also determines how far it can reach to make a
melee attack and how much space it occupies in a fight (see Space/Reach,
below).

The size and type line continues with the creature's type. Type
determines how magic affects a creature. Type determines certain
features, such as Hit Dice size, base attack bonus, base saving throw
bonuses, and skill points.

#### Hit Dice

This line gives the creature's number and type of Hit Dice, and lists
any bonus hit points. A parenthetical note gives the average hit points
for a creature of the indicated number of Hit Dice. A creature's Hit
Dice total is also treated as its level for determining how spells
affect the creature, its rate of natural healing, and its maximum ranks
in a skill.

#### Initiative

This line gives the creature's modifier on initiative checks.

#### Speed

This line gives the creature's tactical speed on land (the amount of
distance it can cover in one move action). If the creature wears armor
that reduces its speed, the creature's base land speed follows.

If the creature has other modes of movement, these are given after (or
in place of) the land speed. Unless noted otherwise, modes of movement
are natural (not magical).

#### Armor Class

The Armor Class line gives the creature's AC for normal combat and
includes a parenthetical mention of the modifiers contributing to it
(usually size, Dexterity, and natural armor). The creature's touch and
flat-footed ACs follow the combat-ready AC.

A creature's armor proficiencies (if it has any) depend on its type, but
in general a creature is automatically proficient with any kind of armor
it is described as wearing (light, medium, or heavy), and with all
lighter kinds of armor.

#### Base Attack/Grapple

The number before the slash on this line is the creature's base attack
bonus (before any modifiers are applied). This number won't often be
used, but it can be handy sometimes, especially if the creature has the
Power Attack or Combat Expertise feats.

The number after the slash is the creature's grapple bonus, which is
used when the creature makes a grapple attack or when someone tries to
grapple the creature. The grapple bonus includes all modifiers that
apply to the creature's grapple checks (base attack bonus, Strength
modifier, special size modifier, and any other applicable modifier, such
as a racial bonus on grapple checks).

#### Attack

This line shows the single attack the creature makes with an attack
action. In most cases, this is also the attack the creature uses when
making an attack of opportunity as well. The attack line provides the
weapon used (natural or manufactured), attack bonus, and form of attack
(melee or ranged). The attack bonus given includes modifications for
size and Strength (for melee attacks) or Dexterity (for ranged attacks).
A creature with the Weapon Finesse feat can use its Dexterity modifier
on melee attacks. If the creature uses natural attacks, the natural
weapon given here is the creature's primary natural weapon. If the
creature has several different weapons at its disposal, the alternatives
are shown, with each different attack separated by the word "or." A
creature can use one of its secondary natural weapons when making an
attack action, but if it does it takes an attack penalty, as noted in
the Full Attack section below. The damage that each attack deals is
noted parenthetically. Damage from an attack is always at least 1 point,
even if a subtraction from a die roll reduces the result to 0 or lower.

#### Full Attack

This line shows all the physical attacks the creature makes when it uses
a full-round action to make a full attack. It gives the number of
attacks along with the weapon, attack bonus, and form of attack (melee
or ranged). The first entry is for the creature's primary weapon, with
an attack bonus including modifications for size and Strength (for melee
attacks) or Dexterity (for ranged attacks). A creature with the Weapon
Finesse feat can use its Dexterity modifier on melee attacks. The
remaining weapons are secondary, and attacks with them are made with a
--5 penalty to the attack roll, no matter how many there are. Creatures
with the Multiattack feat take only a --2 penalty on secondary attacks.
The damage that each attack deals is noted parenthetically. Damage from
an attack is always at least 1 point, even if a subtraction from a die
roll reduces the result to 0 or lower.

A creature's primary attack damage includes its full Strength modifier
(1-1/2 times its Strength bonus if the attack is with the creature's
sole natural weapon) and is given first. Secondary attacks add only 1/2
the creature's Strength bonus and are given second in the parentheses.

If any attacks also have some special effect other than damage, that
information is given here.

Unless noted otherwise, creatures using natural weapons deal double
damage on critical hits.

**Manufactured Weapons:** Creatures that use swords, bows, spears, and
the like follow the same rules as characters do. The bonus for attacks
with two-handed weapons is 1-1/2 times the creature's Strength modifier
(if it is a bonus), and is given first. Offhand weapons add only 1/2 the
Strength bonus and are given second in the parentheses.

#### Space/Reach

This line describes how much space the creature takes up on the battle
grid and thereby needs to fight effectively, as well as how close it has
to be to threaten an opponent. The number before the slash is the
creature's space, or how many feet one side of the creature occupies.
The number after the slash is the creature's natural reach. If the
creature has exceptional reach due to a weapon, tentacle, or the like,
the extended reach and its source are noted in parentheses at the end of
the line.

#### Special Attacks and Special Qualities

Many creatures have unusual abilities. A monster entry breaks these
abilities into special attacks and special qualities. The latter
category includes defenses, vulnerabilities, and other special abilities
that are not modes of attack. A special ability is either extraordinary
(Ex), spell-like (Sp), or supernatural (Su). Additional information
(when needed) is provided in the creature's descriptive text.

When a special ability allows a saving throw, the kind of save and the
save DC is noted in the descriptive text. Most saving throws against
special abilities have DCs calculated as follows: 10 + 1/2 the
attacker's racial Hit Dice + the relevant ability modifier.

The save DC is given in the creature's description along with the
ability on which the DC is based.

#### Saves

This line gives the creature's Fortitude, Reflex, and Will save
modifiers.

#### Abilities

This line lists the creature's ability scores, in the customary order:
Str, Dex, Con, Int, Wis, Cha. Except where noted otherwise, each
creature is assumed to have the standard array of ability scores before
racial adjustments (all 11s and 10s). To determine any creature's racial
ability adjustments, subtract 10 from any even-numbered ability score
and subtract 11 from any odd-numbered score. (Exceptions are noted in
the Combat section of a creature's descriptive text.)

**Strength:** Quadrupeds can carry heavier loads than bipeds can. Any
creature with four or more motive limbs can carry a load as a quadruped,
even if it does not necessarily use all the limbs at once.

**Intelligence:** A creature can speak all the languages mentioned in
its description, plus one additional language per point of Intelligence
bonus. Any creature with an Intelligence score of 3 or higher
understands at least one language (Common, unless noted otherwise).

**Nonabilities:** Some creatures lack certain ability scores. These
creatures do not have an ability score of 0---they lack the ability
altogether. The modifier for a nonability is +0.

#### Skills

This line gives the creature's skills, along with each skill's modifier
(including adjustments for ability scores, armor check penalties, and
any bonuses from feats or racial traits). All listed skills are class
skills, unless the creature has a character class (noted in the entry).
A creature's type and Intelligence score determine the number of skill
points it has.

The Skills section of the creature's description recaps racial bonuses
and other adjustments to skill modifiers for the sake of clarity; these
bonuses should not be added to the listed skill modifiers.

An asterisk (\*) beside the relevant score and in the Skills section of
the descriptive text indicates a conditional adjustment, one that
applies only in certain situations.

**Natural Tendencies:** Some creatures simply aren't made for certain
types of physical activity. If it seems clear that a particular creature
simply is not made for a particular physical activity, that creature
takes a --8 penalty on skill checks that defy its natural tendencies.

In extreme circumstances the creature fails the check automatically.

#### Feats

The line gives the creature's feats. A monster gains feats just as a
character does. Sometimes a creature has one or more bonus feats, marked
with a superscript B (^B^). Creatures often do not have the
prerequisites for a bonus feat. If this is so, the creature can still
use the feat. If you wish to customize the creature with new feats, you
can reassign its other feats, but not its bonus feats. A creature cannot
have a feat that is not a bonus feat unless it has the feat's
prerequisites.

#### Environment

This line gives a type of climate and terrain where the creature is
typically found. This describes a tendency, but is not exclusionary.

#### Organization

This line describes the kinds of groups the creature might form. A range
of numbers in parentheses indicates how many combat-ready adults are in
each type of group. Many groups also have a number of noncombatants,
expressed as a percentage of the fighting population. Noncombatants can
include young, the infirm, slaves, or other individuals who are not
inclined to fight. If the organization line contains the term
"domesticated," the creature is generally found only in the company of
other creatures, whom it serves in some capacity.

#### Challenge Rating

This shows the average level of a party of adventurers for which one
creature would make an encounter of moderate difficulty.

#### Treasure

This line reflects how much wealth the creature owns. In most cases, a
creature keeps valuables in its home or lair and has no treasure with it
when it travels. Intelligent creatures that own useful, portable
treasure (such as magic items) tend to carry and use these, leaving
bulky items at home.

#### Alignment

This line gives the alignment that the creature is most likely to have.
Every entry includes a qualifier that indicates how broadly that
alignment applies to the species as a whole.

#### Advancement

The monster entry usually describes only the most commonly encountered
version of a creature. The advancement line shows how tough a creature
can get, in terms of extra Hit Dice. (This is not an absolute limit, but
exceptions are extremely rare.) Often, intelligent creatures advance by
gaining a level in a character class instead of just gaining a new Hit
Die.

#### Level Adjustment

This line is included in the entries of creatures suitable for use as
player characters or as cohorts (usually creatures with Intelligence
scores of at least 3 and possessing opposable thumbs). Add this number
to the creature's total Hit Dice, including class levels, to get the
creature's effective character level (ECL). A character's ECL affects
the experience the character earns, the amount of experience the
character must have before gaining a new level, and the character's
starting equipment.