---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Monsters / Monsters (H-I)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MONSTERS (H-I)

## Table of Contents

-   [Hag](#hag)
    -   [Combat](#hag--combat)
    -   [Annis](#annis)
        -   [Combat](#annis--combat)
    -   [Green Hag](#green-hag)
        -   [Combat](#green-hag--combat)
    -   [Sea Hag](#sea-hag)
        -   [Combat](#sea-hag--combat)
    -   [Hag Covey](#hag-covey)
        -   [Combat](#hag-covey--combat)
        -   [Hag Eye](#hag-eye)
-   [Half-Celestial](#half-celestial)
    -   [Creating a Half-Celestial](#creating-a-half-celestial)
-   [Half-Dragon](#half-dragon)
    -   [Creating a Half-Dragon](#creating-a-half-dragon)
-   [Half-Fiend](#half-fiend)
    -   [Creating a Half-Fiend](#creating-a-half-fiend)
-   [Halfling](#halfling)
    -   [Combat](#halfling--combat)
    -   [Subraces](#subraces)
        -   [Tallfellow](#tallfellow)
        -   [Deep Halfling](#deep-halfling)
-   [Harpy](#harpy)
    -   [Combat](#harpy--combat)
    -   [Harpy Archer](#harpy-archer)
        -   [Combat](#harpy-archer--combat)
-   [Hell Hound](#hell-hound)
    -   [Combat](#hell-hound--combat)
    -   [Nessian Warhound](#nessian-warhound)
-   [Hippogriff](#hippogriff)
    -   [Combat](#hippogriff--combat)
    -   [Training a Hippogriff](#training-a-hippogriff)
-   [Hobgoblin](#hobgoblin)
    -   [Combat](#hobgoblin--combat)
    -   [Hobgoblin Characters](#hobgoblin-characters)
-   [Homunculus](#homunculus)
    -   [Combat](#homunculus--combat)
    -   [Construction](#homunculus--construction)
-   [Howler](#howler)
    -   [Combat](#howler--combat)
    -   [Training a Howler](#training-a-howler)
-   [Hydra](#hydra)
    -   [Combat](#hydra--combat)
    -   [Pyrohydra](#pyrohydra)
    -   [Cryohydra](#cryohydra)
-   [Inevitable](#inevitable)
    -   [Combat](#inevitable--combat)
    -   [Kolyarut](#kolyarut)
        -   [Combat](#kolyarut--combat)
    -   [Marut](#marut)
        -   [Combat](#marut--combat)
    -   [Zelekhut](#zelekhut)
        -   [Combat](#zelekhut--combat)
-   [Invisible Stalker](#invisible-stalker)
    -   [Combat](#invisible-stalker--combat)

## Hag

Although different hags are unique in appearance and mannerism, they
have many aspects in common. All take the form of crones whose bent
shapes belie their fierce power and swiftness.

Hags speak Giant and Common.

### Combat {#hag--combat}

Hags are tremendously strong. They are naturally resistant to spells and
can cast magic of their own. Hags often gather to form coveys. A covey,
usually containing one hag of each type, can use powers beyond those of
the individual members.

### Annis

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Monstrous Humanoid
  Hit Dice:              7d8+14 (45 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           20 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+18
  Attack:                Claw +13 melee (1d6+7)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +13 melee (1d6+7) and bite +8 melee (1d6+3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, rake 1d6+7, rend 2d6+10, spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 2/bludgeoning, darkvision 60 ft., spell resistance 19
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 25, Dex 12, Con 14, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 10
  Skills:                Bluff +8, Diplomacy +2, Disguise +0 (+2 acting), Hide +5, Intimidate +2, Listen +10, Spot +10
  Feats:                 Alertness, Blind-Fight, Great Fortitude
  Environment:           Cold marshes
  Organization:          Solitary or covey (3 hags of any kind plus 1--8 ogres and 1--4 evil giants)
  Challenge Rating:      6
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An annis commonly uses its *disguise self* ability to take the form of
an exceptionally tall human, a fair giant, or an ogre.

An annis stands some 8 feet tall and weighs about 325 pounds.

#### Combat {#annis--combat}

Though physically powerful, these hags do not favor simple assaults but
try to divide and confuse their foes before combat. They love to pose as
commoners or gentlefolk to lull their victims into a sense of false
security before they attack.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, an annis must hit a Large
or smaller opponent with a claw attack. It can then attempt to start a
grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity.

**Rake (Ex):** Attack bonus +13 melee, damage 1d6+7. An annis can attack
a grappled foe with both claws at no penalty.

**Rend (Ex):** An annis that hits with both claw attacks latches onto
the opponent's body and tears the flesh. This attack automatically deals
an extra 2d6+10 points of damage.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*disguise self*, *fog cloud.* Caster
level 8th.

### Green Hag

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Monstrous Humanoid
  Hit Dice:              9d8+9 (49 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), swim 30 ft.
  Armor Class:           22 (+1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 21
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +9/+13
  Attack:                Claw +13 melee (1d4+4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +13 melee (1d4+4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, weakness, mimicry
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 90 ft., spell resistance 18
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +7
  Abilities:             Str 19, Dex 12, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 14
  Skills:                Concentration +7, Craft or Knowledge (any one) +7, Hide +9, Listen +11, Spot +11 Swim +12
  Feats:                 Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat Casting, Great Fortitude
  Environment:           Temperate marshes
  Organization:          Solitary or covey (3 hags of any kind plus 1--8 ogres and 1--4 evil giants)
  Challenge Rating:      5
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Green hags are found in desolate swamps and dark forests.

A green hag is about the same height and weight as a female human.

#### Combat {#green-hag--combat}

Green hags prefer to attack from hiding, usually after distracting foes.
They often use darkvision to their advantage by attacking during
moonless nights.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*dancing lights, disguise self,
ghost sound* (DC 12), *invisibility, pass without trace, tongues, water
breathing.* Caster level 9th. The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Weakness (Su):** A green hag can weaken a foe by making a special
touch attack. The opponent must succeed on a DC 16 Fortitude save or
take 2d4 points of Strength damage. The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Mimicry (Ex):** A green hag can imitate the sounds of almost any
animal found near its lair.

**Skills:** A green hag has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to
perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to
take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use
the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line.

### Sea Hag

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Monstrous Humanoid (Aquatic)
  Hit Dice:              3d8+6 (19 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), swim 40 ft.
  Armor Class:           14 (+1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+7
  Attack:                Claw +7 melee (1d4+4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +7 melee (1d4+4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Horrific appearance, evil eye
  Special Qualities:     Amphibious, spell resistance 14
  Saves:                 Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 19, Dex 12, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 14
  Skills:                Craft or Knowledge (any one) +3, Hide +4, Listen +6, Spot +6, Swim +12
  Feats:                 Alertness, Toughness
  Environment:           Temperate aquatic
  Organization:          Solitary or covey (3 hags of any kind plus 1--8 ogres and 1--4 evil giants)
  Challenge Rating:      4
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The sea hag is found in the water of seas or overgrown lakes.

A sea hag is about the same height and weight as a female human.

#### Combat {#sea-hag--combat}

Sea hags are not subtle and prefer a direct approach to combat.

They usually remain in hiding until they can affect as many foes as
possible with their horrific appearance.

**Horrific Appearance (Su):** The sight of a sea hag is so revolting
that anyone (other than another hag) who sets eyes upon one must succeed
on a DC 13 Fortitude save or instantly be weakened, taking 2d6 points of
Strength damage. This damage cannot reduce a victim's Strength score
below 0, but anyone reduced to Strength 0 is helpless. Creatures that
are affected by this power or that successfully save against it cannot
be affected again by the same hag's horrific appearance for 24 hours.
The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Evil Eye (Su):** Three times per day, a sea hag can cast its dire gaze
upon any single creature within 30 feet. The target must succeed on a DC
13 Will save or be dazed for three days, although *remove curse* or
*dispel evil* can restore sanity sooner. In addition, an affected
creature must succeed on a DC 13 Fortitude save or die from fright.
Creatures with immunity to fear effects are not affected by the sea
hag's evil eye. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Amphibious (Ex):** Although sea hags are aquatic, they can survive
indefinitely on land.

**Skills:** A sea hag has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform
some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to take 10
on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use the run
action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line.

### Hag Covey

From time to time, a trio of hags gathers as a covey. Usually this foul
triune includes one hag of each type, but this is not always the case.

#### Combat {#hag-covey--combat}

Hags in a covey rely on deception and their boosted magical abilities in
combat.

A covey of hags is 80% likely to be guarded by 1d8 ogres and 1d4 evil
giants who do their bidding. These minions are often disguised with a
*veil* spell to appear less threatening and sent forth as spies. Such
minions often (60%) carry magic stones known as *hag eyes* (see below).

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*animate dead, bestow curse* (DC 17)*,
control weather, dream, forcecage, mind blank, mirage arcana* (DC 18)*,
polymorph, veil* (DC 19)*, vision.* Caster level 9th. The save DCs are
based on a Charisma score of 16. To use one of these abilities (which
requires a full-round action), all three hags must be within 10 feet of
one another, and all must participate.

Once per month, a covey that does not have a *hag eye* can create one
from a gem worth at least 20 gp (see below).

#### Hag Eye

A *hag eye* is a magic gem created by a covey. It appears to be nothing
more than a semiprecious stone, but a *gem of seeing* or other such
effect reveals it as a disembodied eye. Often, a *hag eye* is worn as a
ring, brooch, or other adornment. Any of the three hags who created the
*hag eye* can see through it whenever they wish, so long as it is on the
same plane of existence as the hag. A *hag eye* has hardness 5 and 10
hit points. Destroying a *hag eye* deals 1d10 points of damage to each
member of the covey and causes the one who sustained the greatest damage
to be blinded for 24 hours.

## Half-Celestial

No matter the form, half-celestials are always comely and delightful to
the senses, having golden skin, sparkling eyes, angelic wings, or some
other sign of their higher nature.

### Creating a Half-Celestial

"Half-celestial" is an inherited template that can be added to any
living, corporeal creature with an Intelligence score of 4 or higher and
nonevil alignment (referred to hereafter as the base creature).

A half-celestial uses all the base creature's statistics and special
abilities except as noted here.

**Size and Type:** The creature's type changes to outsider. Do not
recalculate the creature's Hit Dice, base attack bonus, or saves. Size
is unchanged. Half-celestials are normally native outsiders.

**Speed:** A half-celestial has feathered wings and can fly at twice the
base creature's base land speed (good maneuverability). If the base
creature has a fly speed, use that instead.

**Armor Class:** Natural armor improves by +1 (this stacks with any
natural armor bonus the base creature has).

**Special Attacks:** A half-celestial retains all the special attacks of
the base creature and also gains the following special abilities.

*Daylight (Su):* Half-celestials can use a *daylight* effect (as the
spell) at will.

*Smite Evil (Su):* Once per day a half-celestial can make a normal melee
attack to deal extra damage equal to its HD (maximum of +20) against an
evil foe.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** A half-celestial with an Intelligence or
Wisdom score of 8 or higher has two or more spell-like abilities,
depending on its Hit Dice, as indicated on the table below. The
abilities are cumulative

Unless otherwise noted, an ability is usable once per day. Caster level
equals the creature's HD, and the save DC is Charisma-based.

  -------- ----------------------------------------
  HD       Abilities
  1--2     *Protection from evil* 3/day, *bless*
  3--4     Aid, detect evil
  5--6     Cure serious wounds, neutralize poison
  7--8     Holy smite, remove disease
  9--10    Dispel evil
  11--12   Holy word
  13--14   *Holy aura* 3/day, *hallow*
  15--16   Mass charm monster
  17--18   *Summon monster IX* (celestials only)
  19--20   Resurrection
  -------- ----------------------------------------

**Special Qualities:** A half-celestial has all the special qualities of
the base creature, plus the following special qualities.

---Darkvision out to 60 feet.

---Immunity to disease.

---Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10.

---Damage reduction: 5/magic (if HD 11 or less) or 10/magic (if HD 12 or
more).

---A half-celestial's natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for
the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

---Spell resistance equal to creature's HD + 10 (maximum 35).

--- +4 racial bonus on Fortitude saves against poison.

**Abilities:** Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +4, Dex
+2, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +4.

**Skills:** A half-celestial gains skill points as an outsider and has
skill points equal to (8 + Int modifier) x (HD +3). Do not include Hit
Dice from class levels in this calculation---the half-celestial gains
outsider skill points only for its racial Hit Dice, and gains the normal
amount of skill points for its class levels. Treat skills from the base
creature's list as class skills, and other skills as cross-class.

**Challenge Rating:** HD 5 or less, as base creature +1; HD 6 to 10, as
base creature +2; HD 11 or more, as base creature +3.

**Alignment:** Always good (any).

**Level Adjustment:** Same as base creature +4.

## Half-Dragon

Half-dragon creatures are always more formidable than others of their
kind that do not have dragon blood, and their appearance betrays their
nature---scales, elongated features, reptilian eyes, and exaggerated
teeth and claws. Sometimes they have wings.

### Creating a Half-Dragon

"Half-dragon" is an inherited template that can be added to any living,
corporeal creature (referred to hereafter as the base creature).

A half-dragon uses all the base creature's statistics and special
abilities except as noted here.

**Size and Type:** The creature's type changes to dragon. Size is
unchanged. Do not recalculate base attack bonus or saves.

**Hit Dice:** Increase base creature's racial HD by one die size, to a
maximum of d12. Do not increase class HD.

**Speed:** A half-dragon that is Large or larger has wings and can fly
at twice its base land speed (maximum 120 ft.) with average
maneuverability. A half-dragon that is Medium or smaller does not have
wings.

**Armor Class:** Natural armor improves by +4.

**Attack:** A half-dragon has two claw attacks and a bite attack, and
the claws are the primary natural weapon. If the base creature can use
weapons, the half-dragon retains this ability. A half-dragon fighting
without weapons uses a claw when making an attack action. When it has a
weapon, it usually uses the weapon instead.

**Full Attack:** A half-dragon fighting without weapons uses both claws
and its bite when making a full attack. If armed with a weapon, it
usually uses the weapon as its primary attack and its bite as a natural
secondary attack. If it has a hand free, it uses a claw as an additional
natural secondary attack.

**Damage:** Half-dragons have bite and claw attacks. If the base
creature does not have these attack forms, use the damage values in the
table below. Otherwise, use the values below or the base creature's
damage values, whichever are greater.

  ------------ ------------- -------------
  Size         Bite Damage   Claw Damage
  Fine         1             ---
  Diminutive   1d2           1
  Tiny         1d3           1d2
  Small        1d4           1d3
  Medium       1d6           1d4
  Large        1d8           1d6
  Huge         2d6           1d8
  Gargantuan   3d6           2d6
  Colossal     4d6           3d6
  ------------ ------------- -------------

**Special Attacks:** A half-dragon retains all the special attacks of
the base creature and gains a breath weapon based on the dragon variety
(see the table below), usable once per day. A half-dragon's breath
weapon deals 6d8 points of damage. A successful Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2
half-dragon's racial HD + half-dragon's Con modifier) reduces damage by
half.

  ---------------- --------------------------------------
  Dragon Variety   Breath Weapon
  Black            60-foot line of acid
  Blue             60-foot ine of lightning
  Green            30-foot cone of corrosive (acid) gas
  Red              30-foot cone of fire
  White            30-foot cone of cold
  Brass            60-foot line of fire
  Bronze           60-foot line of lightning
  Copper           60-foot line of acid
  Gold             30-foot cone of fire
  Silver           30-foot cone of cold
  ---------------- --------------------------------------

**Special Qualities:** A half-dragon has all the special qualities of
the base creature, plus darkvision out to 60 feet and low-light vision.
A half-dragon has immunity to *sleep* and paralysis effects, and an
additional immunity based on its dragon variety.

  ---------------- ------------- ---------------- -------------
  Dragon Variety   Immunity      Dragon Variety   Immunity
  Black            Acid          Brass            Fire
  Blue             Electricity   Bronze           Electricity
  Green            Acid          Copper           Acid
  Red              Fire          Gold             Fire
  White            Cold          Silver           Cold
  ---------------- ------------- ---------------- -------------

**Abilities:** Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +8, Con
+2, Int +2, Cha +2.

**Skills:** A half-dragon gains skill points as a dragon and has skill
points equal to (6 + Int modifier) x (HD + 3). Do not include Hit Dice
from class levels in this calculation---the half-dragon gains dragon
skill points only for its racial Hit Dice, and gains the normal amount
of skill points for its class levels. Treat skills from the base
creature's list as class skills, and other skills as cross-class.

**Environment:** Same as either the base creature or the dragon variety.

**Challenge Rating:** Same as the base creature + 2 (minimum 3).

**Alignment:** Same as the dragon variety.

**Level Adjustment:** Same as base creature +3.

## Half-Fiend

No matter its form, a half-fiend is always hideous to behold, having
dark scales, horns, glowing red eyes, bat wings, a fetid odor, or some
other obvious sign that it is tainted with evil.

### Creating a Half-Fiend

"Half-fiend" is an inherited template that can be added to any living,
corporeal creature with an Intelligence score of 4 or more and nongood
alignment (referred to hereafter as the base creature).

A half-fiend uses all the base creature's statistics and special
abilities except as noted here.

**Size and Type:** The creature's type changes to outsider. Do not
recalculate Hit Dice, base attack bonus, or saves. Size is unchanged.
Half-fiends are normally native outsiders.

**Speed:** A half-fiend has bat wings. Unless the base creature has a
better fly speed, the creature can fly at the base creature's base land
speed (average maneuverability).

**Armor Class:** Natural armor improves by +1 (this stacks with any
natural armor bonus the base creature has).

**Attack:** A half-fiend has two claw attacks and a bite attack, and the
claws are the primary natural weapon. If the base creature can use
weapons, the half-fiend retains this ability. A half-fiend fighting
without weapons uses a claw when making an attack action. When it has a
weapon, it usually uses the weapon instead.

**Full Attack:** A half-fiend fighting without weapons uses both claws
and its bite when making a full attack. If armed with a weapon, it
usually uses the weapon as its primary attack and its bite as a natural
secondary attack. If it has a hand free, it uses a claw as an additional
natural secondary attack.

**Damage:** Half-fiends have bite and claw attacks. If the base creature
does not have these attack forms, use the damage values in the table
below. Otherwise, use the values below or the base creature's damage
values, whichever are greater.

  ------------ ------------- -------------
  Size         Bite Damage   Claw Damage
  Fine         1             ---
  Diminutive   1d2           1
  Tiny         1d3           1d2
  Small        1d4           1d3
  Medium       1d6           1d4
  Large        1d8           1d6
  Huge         2d6           1d8
  Gargantuan   3d6           2d6
  Colossal     4d6           3d6
  ------------ ------------- -------------

**Special Attacks:** A half-fiend retains all the special attacks of the
base creature and gains the following special attack.

*Smite Good (Su):* Once per day the creature can make a normal melee
attack to deal extra damage equal to its HD (maximum of +20) against a
good foe.

Spell-Like Abilities: A half-fiend with an Intelligence or Wisdom score
of 8 or higher has spell-like abilities depending on its Hit Dice, as
indicated on the table below. The abilities are cumulative. Unless
otherwise noted, an ability is usable once per day. Caster level equals
the creature's HD, and the save DC is Charisma-based.

  -------- -----------------------------------
  HD       Abilities
  1--2     *Darkness* 3/day
  3--4     Desecrate
  5--6     Unholy blight
  7--8     *Poison* 3/day
  9--10    Contagion
  11--12   Blasphemy
  13--14   *Unholy aura* 3/day, *unhallow*
  15--16   Horrid wilting
  17--18   *Summon monster IX* (fiends only)
  19--20   Destruction
  -------- -----------------------------------

**Special Qualities:** A half-fiend has all the special qualities of the
base creature, plus the following special qualities.

---Darkvision out to 60 feet.

---Immunity to poison.

---Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, electricity 10, and fire 10.

---Damage reduction: 5/magic (if HD 11 or less) or 10/magic (if HD 12 or
more).

---A half-fiend's natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for the
purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

---Spell resistance equal to creature's HD + 10 (maximum 35).

**Abilities:** Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +4, Dex
+4, Con +2, Int +4, Cha +2.

**Skills:** A half-fiend gains skill points as an outsider and has skill
points equal to (8 + Int modifier) x (HD + 3). Do not include Hit Dice
from class levels in this calculation---the half-fiend gains outsider
skill points only for its racial Hit Dice, and gains the normal amount
of skill points for its class levels. Treat skills from the base
creature's list as class skills, and other skills as cross-class.

**Challenge Rating:** HD 4 or less, as base creature +1; HD 5 to 10, as
base creature +2; HD 11 or more, as base creature +3.

**Alignment:** Always evil (any).

**Level Adjustment:** +4.

## Halfling

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Halfling, 1st-Level Warrior       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   | Small Humanoid (Halfling)         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Hit Dice:                         | 1d8+1 (5 hp)                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Initiative:                       | +1                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Speed:                            | 20 ft. (4 squares)                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Armor Class:                      | 16 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +3 studded   |
|                                   | leather, +1 light shield), touch  |
|                                   | 12, flat-footed 15                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Base Attack/Grapple:              | +1/--3                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Attack:                           | Longsword +3 melee (1d6/19--20)   |
|                                   | or light crossbow +3 ranged       |
|                                   | (1d6/19--20)                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Full Attack:                      | Longsword +3 melee (1d6/19--20)   |
|                                   | or light crossbow +3 ranged       |
|                                   | (1d6/19--20)                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Space/Reach:                      | 5 ft./5 ft.                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Special Attacks:                  | Halfling traits                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Special Qualities:                | Halfling traits                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Saves:                            | Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +0          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Abilities:                        | Str 11, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 10,   |
|                                   | Wis 9, Cha 8                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Skills:                           | Climb +2, Hide +4, Jump --4,      |
|                                   | Listen +3, Move Silently +1       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Feats:                            | Weapon Focus (longsword)          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Environment:                      | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Warm plains                       |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | (Deep halfling: Warm hills)       |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | <div>                             |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | (Tallfellow: Temperate forests)   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | </div>                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Organization:                     | Company (2--4), squad (11--20     |
|                                   | plus 2 3rd-level sergeants and 1  |
|                                   | leader of 3rd--6th level), or     |
|                                   | band (30--100 plus 100%           |
|                                   | noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level    |
|                                   | sergeant per 20 adults, 5         |
|                                   | 5th-level lieutenants, 3          |
|                                   | 7th-level captains, 6--10 dogs,   |
|                                   | and 2--5 riding dogs)             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Challenge Rating:                 | 1/2                               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Treasure:                         | Standard                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Alignment:                        | Usually neutral                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Advancement:                      | By character class                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Level Adjustment:                 | +0                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Halflings stand about 3 feet tall and usually weigh between 30 and 35
pounds. They have brown or black eyes. Halfling men often have long
sideburns, but beards are rare among them and mustaches almost unseen.
Halflings prefer simple, comfortable, and practical clothes. Unlike
members of most races, they prefer actual comfort to shows of wealth.
Halflings reach adulthood in their early twenties and generally live
into the middle of their second century. Halflings speak Halfling and
Common.

Most halflings encountered outside their home are warriors; the
information in the statistics block is for one of 1st level.

### Combat {#halfling--combat}

Halflings prefer to fight defensively, usually hiding and launching
ranged attacks as the foe approaches. Their tactics are very much like
those of elves but place more emphasis on cover and concealment and less
on mobility.

**Halfling Traits (Ex):** Halflings possess the following racial traits.

--- +2 Dexterity, --2 Strength.

---Small size. +1 bonus to Armor Class, +1 bonus on attack rolls, +4
bonus on Hide checks, --4 penalty on grapple checks, lifting and
carrying limits 3/4 those of Medium characters.

---A halfling's base land speed is 20 feet.

--- +2 racial bonus on Climb, Jump, and Move Silently checks.

--- +1 racial bonus on all saving throws.

--- +2 morale bonus on saving throws against fear. This bonus stacks
with the halfling's +1 bonus on saving throws in general.

--- +1 racial bonus on attack rolls with thrown weapons and slings.

--- +2 racial bonus on Listen checks.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Halfling. Bonus Languages: Dwarven,
Elven, Gnome, Goblin, Orc.

---Favored Class: Rogue.

The halfling warrior presented here had the following ability scores
before racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8.

### Subraces

The information above is for the lightfoot halfling, the most common
halfling variety. There are two other major halfling subraces, which
differ from lightfoot halflings as follows.

#### Tallfellow

Tallfellows are somewhat rare among halfling folk. Tallfellows are 4
feet tall or more and weigh between 30 and 35 pounds. They generally
speak Elven in addition to Common and Halfling.

**Tallfellow Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the
lightfoot halfling traits, except where noted.

--- +2 racial bonus on Search, Spot, and Listen checks. Like an elf, a
tallfellow who merely passes within 5 feet of a secret or concealed door
is entitled to a Search check as though actively looking for it. This
trait replaces the lightfoot's +2 bonus on Listen checks.

---Tallfellows are less athletic than lightfoot halflings and do not
have a racial bonus on Climb, Jump, and Move Silently checks.

#### Deep Halfling

These halflings are shorter and stockier than the more common lightfeet.

Deep halflings are about 2-1/2 tall and weigh between 30 and 35 pounds.
Deep halflings speak Dwarven fluently.

**Deep Halfling Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the
lightfoot halfling traits, except where noted.

---Darkvision out to 60 feet.

---Stonecunning: Like dwarves, deep halflings have a +2 racial bonus on
checks to notice unusual stonework. Something that isn't stone but that
is disguised as stone also counts as unusual stonework. A deep halfling
who merely comes within 10 feet of unusual stonework can make a check as
though actively searching and can use the Search skill to find stonework
traps as a rogue can. A deep halfling can also intuit depth, sensing the
approximate distance underground as naturally as a human can sense which
way is up.

--- +2 racial bonus on Appraise checks and Craft checks that are related
to stone or metal.

---Deep halflings are less athletic than lightfoot halflings and do not
have a racial bonus on Climb, Jump, and Move Silently checks.

## Harpy

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Harpy                                                                Harpy Archer, 7th-Level Fighter
                         Medium Monstrous Humanoid                                            Medium Monstrous Humanoid
  Hit Dice:              7d8 (31 hp)                                                          7d8 + 7d10 + 28 (103 hp)
  Initiative:            +2                                                                   +9
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 80 ft. (average)                             20 ft. (4 squares), fly 80 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           13 (+2 Dex, +1 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 11                    AC 23 (+5 Dex, +1 natural, +6 *+3 studded leather,* +1 *ring of protection +1*), touch 16, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+7                                                                +14/+15
  Attack:                Club +7 melee (1d6)                                                  *+1 frost composite longbow* (+1 Str bonus) +22 ranged (1d8+4/19--20/×3 plus 1d6 cold) or claw +15 melee (1d3+1)
  Full Attack:           Club +7/+2 melee (1d6) and 2 claws +2 melee (1d3)                    *+1 frost composite longbow* (+1 Str bonus) +22/+17/+12 ranged (1d8+4/19--20/×3 plus 1d6 cold) or 2 claws +15 melee (1d3+1)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                          5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Captivating song                                                     Captivating song
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft.                                                    Darkvision 60 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +6                                             Fort +11, Ref +14, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 7, Wis 12, Cha 17                        Str 12, Dex 20, Con 14, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 19
  Skills:                Bluff +11, Intimidate +7, Listen +7, Perform (oratory) +5, Spot +3   Bluff +11, Intimidate +5, Listen +7, Perform (oratory) +10, Spot +5
  Feats:                 Dodge, Flyby Attack, Persuasive                                      Alertness, Improved Critical (composite longbow), Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Manyshot, Point Blank Shot, Rapid Shot, Weapon Focus (composite longbow), Weapon Specialization (composite longbow)
  Environment:           Temperate marshes                                                    Temperate marshes
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or flight (7--12)                                    Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      4                                                                    11
  Treasure:              Standard                                                             Standard (including equipment)
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic evil                                                 Usually chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class                                                   By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +3                                                                   +3
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Harpies like to entrance hapless travelers with their magical songs and
lead them to unspeakable torments. Only when a harpy has finished
playing with its new "toys" will it release them from suffering by
killing and consuming them.

### Combat {#harpy--combat}

When a harpy engages in battle, it prefers to use Flyby Attack and
strike with a melee weapon.

**Captivating Song (Su):** The most insidious ability of the harpy is
its song. When a harpy sings, all creatures (other than harpies) within
a 300-foot spread must succeed on a DC 16 Will save or become
captivated. This is a sonic mind-affecting charm effect. A creature that
successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same harpy's song for
24 hours. The save DC is Charisma-based.

A captivated victim walks toward the harpy, taking the most direct route
available. If the path leads into a dangerous area (through flame, off a
cliff, or the like), that creature gets a second saving throw.
Captivated creatures can take no actions other than to defend
themselves. (Thus, a fighter cannot run away or attack but takes no
defensive penalties.) A victim within 5 feet of the harpy stands there
and offers no resistance to the monster's attacks. The effect continues
for as long as the harpy sings and for 1 round thereafter. A bard's
countersong ability allows the captivated creature to attempt a new Will
save.

**Skills:** Harpies have a +4 racial bonus on Bluff and Listen checks.

### Harpy Archer

A cruel hunter and roaming brigand, the harpy archer has trained as a
fighter specializing in ranged combat. Harpy archers often become
mercenaries, selling their services to the highest bidder. When not
employed, they make ends meet as highway robbers, forcing merchant
caravans to pay protection money.

#### Combat {#harpy-archer--combat}

**Captivating Song (Su):** Will DC 17 negates.

*Possessions: +3 studded leather, +1 frost composite longbow* (+1 Str
bonus), 10 cold iron arrows, 10 silvered arrows, 5 *+2 arrows, lesser
bracers of archery, potion of cure moderate wounds, potion of cat's
grace, cloak of resistance +2, ring of protection +1.* (Different harpy
archers may have different possessions.)

## Hell Hound

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Hellhound                                                                  Nessian Warhound
                         Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Fire, Lawful)                          Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Fire, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              4d8+4 (22 hp)                                                              12d8+60 (114 hp)
  Initiative:            +5                                                                         +6
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)                                                         40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           16 (+1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15                          24 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural, +6 *+2 chain shirt barding*), touch 11, flat-footed 22
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +4/+5                                                                      +12/+24
  Attack:                Bite +5 melee (1d8+1 plus 1d6 fire)                                        Bite +20 melee (2d6+12/19--20 plus 1d8 fire)
  Full Attack:           Bite +5 melee (1d8+1 plus 1d6 fire)                                        Bite +20 melee (2d6+12/19--20 plus 1d8 fire)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                                10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Breath weapon, fiery bite                                                  Breath weapon, fiery bite
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, scent, vulnerability to cold          Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, scent, vulnerability to cold
  Saves:                 Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +4                                                   Fort +13, Ref +10, Will +9
  Abilities:             Str 13, Dex 13, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 6                               Str 26, Dex 14, Con 20, Int 4, Wis 12, Cha 6
  Skills:                Hide +13, Jump +12, Listen +7, Move Silently +13, Spot +7, Survival +7\*   Hide +17, Jump +19, Listen +18, Move Silently +21, Spot +18, Survival +8\*, Tumble +3
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative, Run, Track^B^                                         Alertness, Improved Critical (bite), Improved Initiative, Track, Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           A lawful evil-aligned plane                                                A lawful evil plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or pack (5--12)                                            Solitary, pair, or pack (1--2 Nessian warhounds and 5--12 hell hounds)
  Challenge Rating:      3                                                                          9
  Treasure:              None                                                                       +2 chain shirt barding
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil                                                         Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           5--8 HD (Medium); 9--12 HD (Large)                                         13--17 HD (Large); 18--24 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +3 (cohort)                                                                +4 (cohort)
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A typical hell hound stands 4-1/2 feet high at the shoulder and weighs
120 pounds.

Hell hounds do not speak but understand Infernal.

### Combat {#hell-hound--combat}

Hell hounds are efficient hunters. A favorite pack tactic is to surround
prey quietly, then attack with one or two hounds, driving it toward the
rest with their fiery breath. If the prey doesn't run, the pack closes
in. Hell hounds track fleeing prey relentlessly.

A hell hound's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned

and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** 10-foot cone, once every 2d4 rounds, damage 2d6
fire, Reflex DC 13 half. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Fiery Bite (Su):** A hell hound deals an extra 1d6 points of fire
damage every time it bites an opponent, as if its bite were a flaming
weapon.

**Skills:** Hell hounds have a +5 racial bonus on Hide and Move Silently
checks.

\*They also receive a +8 racial bonus on Survival checks when tracking
by scent, due to their keen sense of smell.

### Nessian Warhound

Nessian warhounds are coalblack mastiffs the size of draft horses, often
fitted with shirts of infernal chainmail.

Nessian warhounds resemble hell hounds, except as otherwise noted.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** 10-foot cone, once every 2d4 rounds, damage 3d6
fire, Reflex DC 21 half. The save DC is Constitution- based.

**Fiery Bite (Su):** A Nessian warhound deals an extra 1d8 points of
fire d a m a g e every time it bites an opponent, as if its bite were a
flaming weapon.

## Hippogriff

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Magical Beast
  Hit Dice:              3d10+9 (25 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares), fly 100 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           15 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+11
  Attack:                Claw +6 melee (1d4+4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +6 melee (1d4+4) and bite +1 melee (1d8+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 18, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8
  Skills:                Listen +4, Spot +8
  Feats:                 Dodge, Wingover
  Environment:           Temperate hills
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or flight (7--12)
  Challenge Rating:      2
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           4--6 HD (Large); 7--9 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

Hippogriffs are aggressive flying creatures that combine features of
horses and giant eagles. Voracious omnivores, hippogriffs will hunt
humanoids as readily as any other meal. A typical hippogriff is 9 feet
long, has a wingspan of 20 feet, and weighs 1,000 pounds.

### Combat {#hippogriff--combat}

Hippogriffs dive at their prey and strike with their clawed forelegs.
When they cannot dive, they slash with claws and beak. Mated pairs and
flights of these creatures attack in concert, diving repeatedly to drive
away or kill intruders. Hippogriffs fight to the death to defend their
nests and their hatchlings, which are prized as aerial mounts and fetch
a handsome price in many civilized areas.

**Skills:** Hippogriffs have a +4 racial bonus on Spot checks.

### Training a Hippogriff

A hippogriff requires training before it can bear a rider in combat.

Training a hippogriff requires six weeks of work and a DC 25 Handle
Animal check. Riding a hippogriff requires an exotic saddle. A
hippogriff can fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also
attack unless he or she succeeds on a Ride check.

Hippogriff eggs are worth 2,000 gp apiece on the open market, while
young are worth 3,000 gp each. Professional trainers charge 1,000 gp to
rear or train a hippogriff.

**Carrying Capacity:** A light load for a hippogriff is up to 300
pounds; a medium load, 301--600 pounds; and a heavy load, 601--900
pounds.

## Hobgoblin

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Hobgoblin, 1st-Level Warrior
                         Medium Humanoid (Goblinoid)
  Hit Dice:              1d8+2 (6 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           15 (+1 Dex, +3 studded leather, +1 light shield), touch 11, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/+2
  Attack:                Longsword +2 melee (1d8+1/19--20) or javelin +2 ranged (1d6+1)
  Full Attack:           Longsword +2 melee (1d8+1/19--20) or javelin +2 ranged (1d6+1)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +1, Will --1
  Abilities:             Str 13, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8
  Skills:                Hide +3, Listen +2, Move Silently +3, Spot +2
  Feats:                 Alertness
  Environment:           Warm hills
  Organization:          Gang (4--9), band (10--100 plus 50% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults and 1 leader of 4th--6th level), warband (10--24), or tribe (30--300 plus 50% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults, 1 or 2 lieutenants of 4th or 5th level, 1 leader of 6th--8th level, 2--4 dire wolves, and 1--4 ogres or 1--2 trolls)
  Challenge Rating:      1/2
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually lawful evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +1
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hobgoblins are larger cousins of goblins. Hobgoblins' hair color ranges
from dark reddish-brown to dark gray. They have dark orange or
red-orange skin. Large males have blue or red noses. Hobgoblins' eyes
are yellowish or dark brown, while their teeth are yellow. Their
garments tend to be brightly colored, often blood red with black-tinted
leather. Their weaponry is kept polished and in good repair. Hobgoblins
speak Goblin and Common. Most hobgoblins encountered outside their homes
are warriors; the information in the statistics block is for one of 1st
level.

### Combat {#hobgoblin--combat}

These creatures have a strong grasp of strategy and tactics and are
capable of carrying out sophisticated battle plans. Under the leadership
of a skilled strategist or tactician, their discipline can prove a
deciding factor. Hobgoblins hate elves and attack them first, in
preference to other opponents.

**Skills:** Hobgoblins have a +4 racial bonus on Move Silently checks.

The hobgoblin warrior presented here had the following ability scores
before racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8.

### Hobgoblin Characters

Hobgoblin characters possess the following racial traits.

--- +2 Dexterity, +2 Constitution.

---A hobgoblin's base land speed is 30 feet.

---Darkvision out to 60 feet.

--- +4 racial bonus on Move Silently checks.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Goblin. Bonus Languages: Draconic,
Dwarven, Infernal, Giant, Orc.

---Favored Class: Fighter.

---Level adjustment +1.

## Homunculus

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------
                         Tiny Construct
  Hit Dice:              2d10 (11 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           14 (+2 Dex, +2 size), touch 14, flat-footed 12
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/--8
  Attack:                Bite +2 melee (1d4--1 plus poison)
  Full Attack:           Bite +2 melee (1d4--1 plus poison)
  Space/Reach:           2-1/2 ft./0 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision
  Saves:                 Fort +0, Ref +4, Will +1
  Abilities:             Str 8, Dex 15, Con ---, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 7
  Skills:                Hide +14, Listen +4, Spot +4
  Feats:                 Lightning Reflexes
  Environment:           Any
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      1
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Any (same as creator)
  Advancement:           3--6 HD (Tiny)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------

A homunculus is a miniature servant created by a wizard. These creatures
are weak combatants but make effective spies, messengers, and scouts. A
homunculus's creator determines its precise features. Homunculi are
little more than tools designed to carry out assigned tasks. They are
extensions of their creators, sharing the same alignment and basic
nature. A homunculus cannot speak, but the process of creating one links
it telepathically with its creator.

It knows what its master knows and can convey to him or her everything
it sees and hears, out to a distance of 1,500 feet. A homunculus never
travels beyond this range willingly, though it can be removed forcibly.
If this occurs, the creature does everything in its power to regain
contact with its master. An attack that destroys a homunculus deals 2d10
points of damage to its master.

If the creature's master is slain, the homunculus also dies, and its
body swiftly melts away into a pool of ichor.

### Combat {#homunculus--combat}

Homunculi land on their victims and bite with their venomous fangs.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 13, initial damage sleep for 1
minute, secondary damage sleep for another 5d6 minutes. The save DC is
Constitution-based and includes a +2 racial bonus.

### Construction {#homunculus--construction}

A homunculus is shaped from a mixture of clay, ashes, mandrake root,
spring water, and one pint of the creator's own blood. The materials
cost 50 gp. The creature's master may assemble the body or hire someone
else to do the job. Creating the body requires a DC 12 Craft (sculpting)
check or a DC 12 Craft (pottery) check.

After the body is sculpted, it is animated through an extended magical
ritual that requires a specially prepared laboratory or workroom,
similar to an alchemist's laboratory and costing 500 gp to establish. If
the creator is personally constructing the creature's body, the building
and ritual can be performed together.

A homunculus with more than 2 Hit Dice can be created, but each
additional Hit Die adds +2,000 gp to the cost to create.

Craft Construct, *arcane eye, mirror image, mending,* caster must be at
least 4th level; Price --- (never sold); Cost 1,050 gp + 78 XP.

## Howler

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Chaotic, Evil, Extraplanar)
  Hit Dice:              6d8+12 (39 hp)
  Initiative:            +7
  Speed:                 60 ft. (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+15
  Attack:                Bite +10 melee (2d8+5)
  Full Attack:           Bite +10 melee (2d8+5) and 1d4 quills +5 melee (1d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Quills, howl
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +7
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 17, Con 15, Int 6, Wis 14, Cha 8
  Skills:                Climb +14, Hide +8, Listen +13, Move Silently +12, Search +7, Spot +13, Survival +2 (+4 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Combat Reflexes, Improved Initiative
  Environment:           A chaotic-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, gang (2--4), or pack (6--10)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           7--9 HD (Large); 11--18 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +3 (cohort)
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Howlers live on planes where chaos and evil hold sway. A howler is about
8 feet long and weighs about 2,000 pounds. Although they are
surprisingly intelligent, howlers do not speak---they only howl. If
there is a language within the howls, as some have suggested, even
spells cannot decipher it. Howlers understand Abyssal.

### Combat {#howler--combat}

Howlers attack in groups, for they are cowardly and cruel. They prefer
to charge into combat, race out, and then charge in again. A howler's
natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as
chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Quills (Ex):** A howler's neck bristles with long quills. While
biting, the creature thrashes about, striking with 1d4 of them. An
opponent hit by a howler's quill attack must succeed on a DC 16 Reflex
save or have the quill break off in his or her flesh. Lodged quills
impose a --1 penalty on attacks, saves, and checks per quill. The save
DC is Dexterity-based.

A quill can be removed safely with a DC 20 Heal check; otherwise,
removing a quill deals an extra 1d6 points of damage.

**Howl (Ex):** All beings other than outsiders that hear the creature's
howling for an hour or longer are subject to its effect, though it does
not help the howler in combat. Anyone within hearing range of a howler
for a full hour must succeed on a DC 12 Will save or take 1 point of
Wisdom damage. The save DC is Charisma-based. The save must be repeated
for each hour of exposure. This is a sonic mind-affecting effect.

### Training a Howler

Although intelligent, a howler requires training before it can bear a
rider in combat. To be trained, a howler must have a friendly attitude
toward the trainer (this can be achieved through a successful Diplomacy
check). Training a friendly howler requires six weeks of work and a DC
25 Handle Animal check. Riding a howler requires an exotic saddle. A
howler can fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also
attack unless he or she succeeds on a Ride check.

**Carrying Capacity:** A light load for a howler is up to 460 pounds; a
medium load, 461--920 pounds; and a heavy load, 921--1,380 pounds. A
howler can drag 6,900 pounds.

## Hydra

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Five-Headed     | Six-Headed      | Seven-Headed    |
|                 | Hydra           | Hydra           | Hydra           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Huge Magical    | Huge Magical    | Huge Magical    |
|                 | Beast           | Beast           | Beast           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Hit Dice:       | 5d10+28 (55 hp) | 6d10+33 (66 hp) | 7d10+38 (77 hp) |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Initiative:     | +1              | +1              | +1              |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Speed:          | 20 ft. (4       | 20 ft. (4       | 20 ft. (4       |
|                 | squares), swim  | squares), swim  | squares), swim  |
|                 | 20 ft.          | 20 ft.          | 20 ft.          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Armor Class:    | 15 (--2 size,   | 16 (--2 size,   | 17 (--2 size,   |
|                 | +1 Dex, +6      | +1 Dex, +7      | +1 Dex, +8      |
|                 | natural), touch | natural), touch | natural), touch |
|                 | 9, flat-footed  | 9, flat-footed  | 9, flat-footed  |
|                 | 14              | 15              | 16              |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Base            | +5/+16          | +6/+17          | +7/+19          |
| Attack/Grapple: |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Attack:         | 5 bites +6      | 6 bites +8      | 7 bites +10     |
|                 | melee (1d10+3)  | melee (1d10+3)  | melee (1d10+4)  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Full Attack:    | 5 bites +6      | 6 bites +8      | 7 bites +10     |
|                 | melee (1d10+3)  | melee (1d10+3)  | melee (1d10+4)  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Space/Reach:    | 15 ft./10 ft.   | 15 ft./10 ft.   | 15 ft./10 ft.   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Special         | ---             | ---             | ---             |
| Attacks:        |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Special         | Darkvision 60   | Darkvision 60   | Darkvision 60   |
| Qualities:      | ft., fast       | ft., fast       | ft., fast       |
|                 | healing 15,     | healing 16,     | healing 17,     |
|                 | low-light       | low-light       | low-light       |
|                 | vision, scent   | vision, scent   | vision, scent   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Saves:          | Fort +9, Ref    | Fort +10, Ref   | Fort +10, Ref   |
|                 | +5, Will +3     | +6, Will +4     | +6, Will +4     |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Abilities:      | Str 17, Dex 12, | Str 17, Dex 12, | Str 19, Dex 12, |
|                 | Con 20, Int 2,  | Con 20, Int 2,  | Con 20, Int 2,  |
|                 | Wis 10, Cha 9   | Wis 10, Cha 9   | Wis 10, Cha 9   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Skills:         | Listen +6, Spot | Listen +6, Spot | Listen +7, Spot |
|                 | +6, Swim +11    | +7, Swim +11    | +7, Swim +12    |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Feats:          | Combat          | Combat          | Combat          |
|                 | Reflexes^B^,    | Reflexes^B^,    | Reflexes^B^,    |
|                 | Iron Will,      | Iron Will,      | Iron Will,      |
|                 | Toughness       | Toughness,      | Toughness,      |
|                 |                 | Weapon Focus    | Weapon Focus    |
|                 |                 | (bite)          | (bite)          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Environment:    | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | Temperate       | Temperate       | Temperate       |
|                 | marshes         | marshes         | marshes         |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | (Pyro: Warm     | (Pyro: Warm     | (Pyro: Warm     |
|                 | marshes)        | marshes)        | marshes)        |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | (Cryo: Cold     | (Cryo: Cold     | (Cryo: Cold     |
|                 | marshes)        | marshes)        | marshes)        |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Organization:   | Solitary        | Solitary        | Solitary        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Challenge       | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
| Rating:         |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 4 (normal);     | 5 (normal);     | 6 (normal);     |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 6 (pyro- or     | 7 (pyro- or     | 8 (pyro- or     |
|                 | cryo-)          | cryo-)          | cryo-)          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Treasure:       | 1/10 coins; 50% | 1/10 coins; 50% | 1/10 coins; 50% |
|                 | goods; 50%      | goods; 50%      | goods; 50%      |
|                 | items           | items           | items           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Alignment:      | Usually neutral | Usually neutral | Usually neutral |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Advancement:    | ---             | ---             | ---             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Level           | ---             | ---             | ---             |
| Adjustment:     |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Eight-Headed    | Nine-Headed     | Ten-Headed      |
|                 | Hydra           | Hydra           | Hydra           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Huge Magical    | Huge Magical    | Huge Magical    |
|                 | Beast           | Beast           | Beast           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Hit Dice:       | 8d10+43 (87 hp) | 9d10+48 (97 hp) | 10d10+53 (108   |
|                 |                 |                 | hp)             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Initiative:     | +1              | +1              | +1              |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Speed:          | 20 ft. (4       | 20 ft. (4       | 20 ft. (4       |
|                 | squares), swim  | squares), swim  | squares), swim  |
|                 | 20 ft.          | 20 ft.          | 20 ft.          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Armor Class:    | 18 (--2 size,   | 19 (--2 size,   | 20 (--2 size,   |
|                 | +1 Dex, +9      | +1 Dex, +10     | +1 Dex, +11     |
|                 | natural), touch | natural), touch | natural), touch |
|                 | 9, flat-footed  | 9, flat-footed  | 9, flat-footed  |
|                 | 17              | 18              | 19              |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Base            | +8/+20          | +9/+22          | +10/+23         |
| Attack/Grapple: |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Attack:         | 8 bites +11     | 9 bites +13     | 10 bites +14    |
|                 | melee (1d10+4)  | melee (1d10+5)  | melee (1d10+5)  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Full Attack:    | 8 bites +11     | 9 bites +13     | 10 bites +14    |
|                 | melee (1d10+4)  | melee (1d10+5)  | melee (1d10+5)  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Space/Reach:    | 15 ft./10 ft.   | 15 ft./10 ft.   | 15 ft./10 ft.   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Special         | ---             | ---             | ---             |
| Attacks:        |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Special         | Darkvision 60   | Darkvision 60   | Darkvision 60   |
| Qualities:      | ft., fast       | ft., fast       | ft., fast       |
|                 | healing 18,     | healing 19,     | healing 20,     |
|                 | low-light       | low-light       | low-light       |
|                 | vision, scent   | vision, scent   | vision, scent   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Saves:          | Fort +11, Ref   | Fort +11, Ref   | Fort +12, Ref   |
|                 | +7, Will +4     | +7, Will +5     | +8, Will +3     |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Abilities:      | Str 19, Dex 12, | Str 21, Dex 12, | Str 21, Dex 12, |
|                 | Con 20, Int 2,  | Con 20, Int 2,  | Con 20, Int 2,  |
|                 | Wis 10, Cha 9   | Wis 10, Cha 9   | Wis 10, Cha 9   |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Skills:         | Listen +7, Spot | Listen +8, Spot | Listen +8, Spot |
|                 | +8, Swim +12    | +8, Swim +13    | +9, Swim +13    |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Feats:          | Combat          | Blind-Fight,    | Blind-Fight,    |
|                 | Reflexes^B^,    | Combat          | Combat          |
|                 | Iron Will,      | Reflexes^B^,    | Reflexes^B^,    |
|                 | Toughness,      | Iron Will,      | Iron Will,      |
|                 | Weapon Focus    | Toughness,      | Toughness,      |
|                 | (bite)          | Weapon Focus    | Weapon Focus    |
|                 |                 | (bite)          | (bite)          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Environment:    | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | Temperate       | Temperate       | Temperate       |
|                 | marshes         | marshes         | marshes         |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | (Pyro: Warm     | (Pyro: Warm     | (Pyro: Warm     |
|                 | marshes)        | marshes)        | marshes)        |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | (Cryo: Cold     | (Cryo: Cold     | (Cryo: Cold     |
|                 | marshes)        | marshes)        | marshes)        |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Organization:   | Solitary        | Solitary        | Solitary        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Challenge       | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
| Rating:         |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 7 (normal);     | 8 (normal);     | 9 (normal);     |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 9 (pyro- or     | 10 (pyro- or    | 11 (pyro- or    |
|                 | cryo-)          | cryo-)          | cryo-)          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Treasure:       | 1/10 coins; 50% | 1/10 coins; 50% | 1/10 coins; 50% |
|                 | goods; 50%      | goods; 50%      | goods; 50%      |
|                 | items           | items           | items           |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Alignment:      | Usually neutral | Usually neutral | Usually neutral |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Advancement:    | ---             | ---             | ---             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Level           | ---             | ---             | ---             |
| Adjustment:     |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Eleven-Headed Hydra   | Twelve-Headed Hydra   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Huge Magical Beast    | Huge Magical Beast    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Hit Dice:             | 11d10+58 (118 hp)     | 12d10+63 (129 hp)     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Initiative:           | +1                    | +1                    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Speed:                | 20 ft. (4 squares),   | 20 ft. (4 squares),   |
|                       | swim 20 ft.           | swim 20 ft.           |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Armor Class:          | 21 (--2 size, +1 Dex, | 22 (--2 size, +1 Dex, |
|                       | +12 natural), touch   | +13 natural), touch   |
|                       | 9, flat-footed 20     | 9, flat-footed 21     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Base Attack/Grapple:  | +11/+25               | +12/+26               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Attack:               | 11 bites +16 melee    | 12 bites +17 melee    |
|                       | (1d10+6)              | (2d8+6)               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Full Attack:          | 11 bites +16 melee    | 12 bites +17 melee    |
|                       | (1d10+6)              | (2d8+6)               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Space/Reach:          | 15 ft./10 ft.         | 15 ft./10 ft.         |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Special Attacks:      | ---                   | ---                   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Special Qualities:    | Darkvision 60 ft.,    | Darkvision 60 ft.,    |
|                       | fast healing 21,      | fast healing 22,      |
|                       | low-light vision,     | low-light vision,     |
|                       | scent                 | scent                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Saves:                | Fort +12, Ref +8,     | Fort +13, Ref +9,     |
|                       | Will +5               | Will +6               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Abilities:            | Str 23, Dex 12, Con   | Str 23, Dex 12, Con   |
|                       | 20, Int 2, Wis 10,    | 20, Int 2, Wis 10,    |
|                       | Cha 9                 | Cha 9                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Skills:               | Listen +9, Spot +9,   | Listen +9, Spot +10,  |
|                       | Swim +14              | Swim +14              |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Feats:                | Blind-Fight, Combat   | Blind-Fight, Combat   |
|                       | Reflexes^B^, Iron     | Reflexes^B^, Improved |
|                       | Will, Toughness,      | Natural Attack        |
|                       | Weapon Focus (bite)   | (bite), Iron Will,    |
|                       |                       | Toughness, Weapon     |
|                       |                       | Focus (bite)          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Environment:          | <div>                 | <div>                 |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Temperate marshes     | Temperate marshes     |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                | </div>                |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 | <div>                 |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Pyro: Warm marshes)  | (Pyro: Warm marshes)  |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                | </div>                |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 | <div>                 |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Cryo: Cold marshes)  | (Cryo: Cold marshes)  |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                | </div>                |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Organization:         | Solitary              | Solitary              |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Challenge Rating:     | <div>                 | <div>                 |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | 10 (normal);          | 11 (normal);          |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                | </div>                |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 | <div>                 |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | 12 (pyro- or cryo-)   | 13 (pyro- or cryo-)   |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                | </div>                |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Treasure:             | 1/10 coins; 50%       | 1/10 coins; 50%       |
|                       | goods; 50% items      | goods; 50% items      |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Alignment:            | Usually neutral       | Usually neutral       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Advancement:          | ---                   | ---                   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Level Adjustment:     | ---                   | ---                   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Hydras are reptile-like monsters with multiple heads. A hydra is
gray-brown to dark brown, with a light yellow or tan underbelly. The
eyes are amber and the teeth are yellow-white. It is about 20 feet long
and weighs about 4,000 pounds. Hydras do not speak.

### Combat {#hydra--combat}

Hydras can attack with all their heads at no penalty, even if they move
or charge during the round.

A hydra can be killed either by severing all its heads or by slaying its
body. To sever a head, an opponent must make a successful sunder attempt
with a slashing weapon. (The player should declare where the attack is
aimed before making the attack roll.) Making a sunder attempt provokes
an attack of opportunity unless the foe has the Improved Sunder feat. An
opponent can strike at a hydra's heads from any position in which he
could strike at the hydra itself, because the hydra's head writhe and
whip about in combat. An opponent can ready an action to attempt to
sunder a hydra's head when the creature bites at him. Each of a hydra's
heads has hit points equal to the creature's full normal hit point
total, divided by its original number of heads. Losing a head deals
damage to the body equal to half the head's full normal hit points. A
natural reflex seals the neck shut to prevent further blood loss. A
hydra can no longer attack with a severed head but takes no other
penalties.

Each time a head is severed, two new heads spring from the stump in 1d4
rounds. A hydra can never have more than twice its original number of
heads at any one time, and any extra heads it gains beyond its original
number wither and die within a day. To prevent a severed head from
growing back into two heads, at least 5 points of fire or acid damage
must be dealt to the stump (a touch attack to hit) before the new heads
appear. A flaming weapon (or similar effect) deals its energy damage to
the stump in the same blow in which a head is severed. Fire or acid
damage from an area effect may burn multiple stumps in addition to
dealing damage to the hydra's body. A hydra does not die from losing its
heads until all its heads have been cut off and the stumps seared by
fire or acid.

A hydra's body can be slain just like any other creature's, but hydras
possess fast healing (see below) and are difficult to defeat in this
fashion. Any attack that is not (or cannot be) an attempt to sunder a
head affects the body.

Targeted magical effects cannot sever a hydra's heads (and thus must be
directed at the body) unless they deal slashing damage and could be used
to make sunder attempts.

**Fast Healing (Ex):** Each round, a hydra heals damage equal to 10 +
the number of its original heads.

**Skills:** Hydras have a +2 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks,
thanks to their multiple heads.

A hydra has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform some special
action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to take 10 on a Swim
check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use the run action while
swimming, provided it swims in a straight line.

**Feats:** A hydra's Combat Reflexes feat allows it to use all its heads
for attacks of opportunity.

### Pyrohydra

Huge Magical Beast (Fire)

These reddish hydras can breathe jets of fire 10 feet high, 10 feet
wide, and 20 feet long. All heads breathe once every 1d4 rounds. Each
jet deals 3d6 points of fire damage per head. A successful Reflex save
halves the damage. The save DC is 10 + 1/2 hydra's original number of
heads + hydra's Con modifier.

Fire attacks cannot prevent a pyrohydra's stump from growing new heads
(since a pyrohydra has immunity to fire), but 5 points of cold damage
does.

### Cryohydra

Huge Magical Beast (Cold)

These purplish hydras can breathe jets of frost 10 feet high, 10 feet
wide, and 20 feet long. All heads breathe once every 1d4 rounds. Each
jet deals 3d6 points of cold damage per head. A successful Reflex save
halves the damage. The save DC is 10 + 1/2 hydra's original number of
heads + hydra's Con modifier.

Cold attacks cannot prevent a cryohydra's stump from growing new heads
(since a cryohydra has immunity to cold), but 5 points of fire damage
does.

## Inevitable

Inevitables are constructs whose sole aim is to enforce the natural laws
of the universe.

Each type of inevitable is designed to find and punish a particular kind
of transgression, hunting down a person or group that has violated a
fundamental principle. When an inevitable is created, it receives its
first mission, then finds the transgressors and metes out appropriate
punishment. The sentence is usually death, although some inevitables
insist on compensation to the wronged party instead, using *geas* and
*mark of justice* to ensure compliance. From its first step, an
inevitable focuses totally on its target. It continues its efforts no
matter how cold the trail or hopeless the task. Inevitables are
single-minded in pursuit of their quarry, but they are under orders to
leave innocents alone. Accomplices to their prey are fair game, however,
which sometimes creates conflicts within their programming.

Inevitables gladly sacrifice themselves to complete a mission, but they
aren't suicidal. Faced with impending defeat, they are likely to
withdraw and seek a way to even the odds. They are determined but
patient foes. They ally with others if that helps accomplish their
mission, but they have a hard time keeping allies for long.

Inevitables tend to stick out in a crowd while they're in observation
mode, but they seem oblivious to the attention. Their forms vary, but
all inevitables are gold-and-silver clockwork creatures, with gears and
pistons where muscles would be on flesh-and-blood creatures. Their eyes
glow with a golden radiance.

Note that unlike most constructs, inevitables have an Intelligence score
and can think, learn, and remember.

Inevitables speak Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal, and the native language
of their first target.

### Combat {#inevitable--combat}

Unless their very existence is threatened, inevitables focus completely
on the transgressor they've been assigned to, ignoring other combatants
completely. An inevitable might attack anyone who hinders its progress,
but it won't tarry beyond the point where it can reengage its quarry.
Inevitables take self-defense very seriously; anyone who attacks an
inevitable with what the creature perceives as deadly force is met with
deadly force in return.

An inevitable's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Fast Healing (Ex):** An inevitable heals a certain amount of damage
each round (specified in each variety's description) as long as it has
at least 1 hit point. However, damage dealt by chaotic weapons heals at
the normal rate.

### Kolyarut

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Construct (Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              13d10+20 (91 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 20 ft. in banded mail (4 squares); base speed 30 ft.
  Armor Class:           27 (+1 Dex, +10 natural, +6 banded mail) touch 11, flat-footed 26
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +9/+11
  Attack:                Vampiric touch +11 melee touch (5d6) or enervation ray +10 ranged touch (as spell) or *+2 longsword* +13 melee (1d8+5/19--20) or slam +11 melee (1d6+3)
  Full Attack:           Vampiric touch +11/+6 melee touch (5d6) or enervation ray +10 ranged touch (as spell) or *+2 longsword* +13/+8 melee (1d8+5/19--20) or slam +11/+6 melee (1d6+3)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Enervation ray, spell-like abilities, vampiric touch
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, damage reduction 10/chaotic, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5, low-light vision, spell resistance 22
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +7
  Abilities:             Str 14, Dex 13, Con ---, Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 16
  Skills:                Diplomacy +5, Disguise +12, Gather Information +12, Listen +11, Search +5, Sense Motive +12, Spot +11, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Combat Casting, Great Fortitude, Lightning Reflexes, Quickened Spell-Like Ability (*suggestion*)
  Environment:           A lawful-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      12
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always lawful neutral
  Advancement:           14--22 HD (Medium); 23--39 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Kolyaruts mete out punishment to those who break bargains and oaths.

Before beginning a mission against a deal-breaker, a kolyarut learns as
much about the contract or oath as possible. It's not interested in
those who break deals accidentally or against their will--- only those
who willingly break contracts violate the principle that kolyaruts are
created to uphold. If a written contract was broken, the kolyarut
typically carries a copy of the contract with it.

Kolyaruts are the most talkative of the inevitables, making credible
attempts at social niceties such as proper greetings before getting down
to the matter at hand. They can use *disguise self* to appear as almost
any kind of humanoid---useful if they need to go undercover to catch
their quarry.

#### Combat {#kolyarut--combat}

Like all inevitables, a kolyarut is patient enough to study a target
before striking. It has a good idea of the deal-breaker's abilities and
defenses before it enters battle. When it fights, it tries to get the
conflict over as soon as possible, minimizing excess bloodshed and
mayhem. It doesn't let concern for innocents delay or endanger its
mission, however.

A kolyarut's favorite tactic is to use *invisibility* or *disguise self*
to sneak close, then eliminate the quarry with its vampiric touch
ability before it can react. A kolyarut has no compunctions about using
its vampiric touch ability on allies to increase its own power, if doing
so helps it complete its mission.

A kolyarut's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Enervation Ray (Su):** A kolyarut can fire a black enervation ray at
targets within 200 feet. The effect is identical with the *enervation*
spell (caster level 13th).

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*discern lies* (DC 17)*, disguise
self, fear* (DC 17)*, hold person* (DC 16)*, invisibility, locate
creature, suggestion* (DC 16); 1/day---*hold monster* (DC 17)*, mark of
justice;* 1/week--- *geas/quest.* Caster level 13th. The save DCs are
Charisma-based.

**Vampiric Touch (Su):** As a melee touch attack, a kolyarut can steal
life force from its foe, as the *vampiric touch* spell (caster level
13th).

**Skills:** A kolyarut has a +4 racial bonus on Disguise, Gather
Information, and Sense Motive checks.

### Marut

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Construct (Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              15d10+30 (112 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 30 ft. in full plate armor (6 squares); base speed 40 ft.
  Armor Class:           34 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +16 natural, +8 full plate armor), touch 10, flat-footed 33
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +11/+27
  Attack:                Slam +22 melee (2d6+12 plus 3d6 sonic or 3d6 electricity)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +22 melee (2d6+12 plus 3d6 sonic or 3d6 electricity)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Fists of thunder and lightning, spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, damage reduction 15/chaotic, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 10, low-light vision, spell resistance 25
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 35, Dex 13, Con ---, Int 12, Wis 17, Cha 18
  Skills:                Concentration +13, Diplomacy +6, Knowledge (religion) +10, Listen +16, Search +10, Sense Motive +12, Spot +16, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Ability Focus (fists), Awesome Blow, Combat Casting, Great Fortitude, Improved Bull Rush, Power Attack
  Environment:           A lawful-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      15
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always lawful neutral
  Advancement:           16--28 HD (Large); 29--45 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maruts confront those who would try to deny the grave itself.

Any who use unnatural means to extend their life span could be targeted
by a marut. Those who take extraordinary measures to cheat death in some
other way might be labeled transgressors as well. Those who use magic to
reverse death aren't worthy of a marut's attention unless they do so
repeatedly or on a massive scale.

When a marut has identified its target, it walks surely and implacably
toward the foe, never resting.

#### Combat {#marut--combat}

Once it has found its target, a marut brings it the death it has been
trying to avoid. Those who defile death through necromancy may instead
receive a *geas* and/or *mark of justice* to enforce proper respect. It
typically uses *wall of force* to shut off any escape routes, then opens
up with *chain lightning* while it closes to melee range. Once there, it
strikes with its massive fists, using *circle of death* if beset by
numbers of defenders. It hits spellcasting opponents with repeated uses
of *greater dispel magic,* and it uses *dimension door* and *locate
creature* to track down foes who flee.

A marut's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated
as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Fists of Thunder and Lightning (Su):** A marut's left fist delivers a
loud thunderclap whenever it hits something, dealing an extra 3d6 points
of sonic damage and causing the target to be deafened for 2d6 rounds
(Fortitude DC 31 negates the deafness). Its right fist delivers a shock
for an extra 3d6 points of electricity damage, and the flash of
lightning causes the target to be blinded for 2d6 rounds (Fortitude DC
31 negates the blindness). The save DCs are Strength-based and include
the marut's Ability Focus feat.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*air walk, dimension door, fear* (DC
18)*, greater command* (DC 19)*, greater dispel magic, mass inflict
light wounds* (DC 19), *locate creature, true seeing;* 1/day---*chain
lightning* (DC 20)*, circle of death* (DC 20)*, mark of justice, wall of
force;* 1/week--- *earthquake* (DC 22)*, geas/quest, plane shift* (DC
21). Caster level 14th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Skills:** A marut has a +4 racial bonus on Concentration, Listen, and
Spot checks.

### Zelekhut

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Construct (Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              8d10+30 (74 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 35 ft. in plate barding (7 squares), fly 40 ft. (average) in plate barding (8 squares); base speed 50 ft., fly 60 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           27 (--1 size, +10 natural, +8 plate barding), touch 9, flat-footed 27
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+15
  Attack:                Spiked chain +10 melee (2d6+5 plus 1d6 electricity)
  Full Attack:           2 spiked chains +10 melee (2d6+5 plus 1d6 electricity)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, damage reduction 10/chaotic, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5, low-light vision, spell resistance 20
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 11, Con ---, Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 15
  Skills:                Diplomacy +4, Listen +9, Search +9, Sense Motive +12, Spot +9, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Great Fortitude, Ride-By Attack, Spirited Charge
  Environment:           A lawful-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always lawful neutral
  Advancement:           9--16 HD (Large); 17--24 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +7
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zelekhuts are charged with hunting down those who would deny
justice---especially those who flee to escape punishment. Expert
trackers, they use a combination of natural skill and magic to find
fugitives wherever they may hide.

A zelekhut may initially appear rather non-threatening---but when it is
about to enter combat, it can cause two spiked chains to spring forth
from its forearms as a free action. In similar fashion, it can cause a
pair of golden metallic wings to emerge from its back. Retracting the
chains or the wings is also a free action.

#### Combat {#zelekhut--combat}

Once it has found its fugitive, a zelekhut uses its speed and its
spell-like abilities to cover the most likely escape routes. Then it
immobilizes any defenders while attempting to protect any innocent
bystanders. Finally, it apprehends the fugitive with its spiked chains,
tripping or disarming the foe as needed.

A zelekhut's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*clairaudience/clairvoyance,
dimensional anchor, dispel magic, fear* (DC 16)*, hold person* (DC 15)*,
locate creature, true seeing;* 3/day---*hold monster* (DC 17)*, mark of
justice*; 1/week--- *lesser geas* (DC 16). Caster level 8th. The save
DCs are Charisma-based.

**Skills:** A zelekhut has a +4 racial bonus on Search and Sense Motive
checks.

**Feats:** Due to its centaur-like construction, a zelekhut qualifies
for feats as if it had the Mounted Combat feat.

## Invisible Stalker

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Elemental (Air, Extraplanar)
  Hit Dice:              8d8+16 (52 hp)
  Initiative:            +8
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 30 ft. (perfect)
  Armor Class:           17 (--1 size, +4 Dex, +4 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+14
  Attack:                Slam +10 melee (2d6+4)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +10 melee (2d6+4)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, natural invisibility, improved tracking
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +10, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 18, Dex 19, Con 14, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +13, Move Silently +15, Search +13, Spot +13, Survival +2 (+4 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Combat Reflexes, Improved Initiative, Weapon Focus (slam)
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Air
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           9--12 HD (Large); 13--24 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Invisible stalkers are creatures native to the Elemental Plane of Air.
They sometimes serve wizards and sorcerers, who summon them to perform
specific tasks.

A summoned invisible stalker undertakes whatever task the summoner
commands, even if the task sends it hundreds or thousands of miles away.
The creature follows a command until the task is completed and obeys
only the summoner. However, it resents protracted missions or complex
tasks and seeks to pervert its instructions accordingly.

Invisible stalkers have an amorphous form. A *see invisibility* spell
shows only a dim outline of a cloud, while a *true seeing* spell reveals
a roiling cloud of vapor.

These creatures speak only Auran but can understand Common.

### Combat {#invisible-stalker--combat}

An invisible stalker attacks by using the air itself as a weapon. It
creates a sudden, intense blast of wind that pounds a single target on
the same plane as the creature.

An invisible stalker can be killed only when it is on the Elemental
Plane of Air. When performing a task elsewhere, it automatically returns
to its home plane when it takes damage sufficient to destroy it.

**Natural Invisibility (Su):** This ability is constant, allowing a
stalker to remain invisible even when attacking. This ability is
inherent and not subject to the *invisibility purge* spell.

**Improved Tracking (Ex):** An invisible stalker is a consummate tracker
and makes Spot checks instead of the usual Survival checks to trace a
creature's passage.
