---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Monsters / Monsters (Dr-Dw)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MONSTERS (Dr-Dw)

## Table of Contents

-   [Dragon, True](#dragon-true)
    -   [Combat](#dragon-true--combat)
    -   [Dragon Overland Movement](#dragon-overland-movement)
    -   [Dragonhide](#dragonhide)
-   [Chromatic Dragons](#chromatic-dragons)
    -   [Black Dragon](#black-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#black-dragon--combat)
    -   [Blue Dragon](#blue-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#blue-dragon--combat)
    -   [Green Dragon](#green-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#green-dragon--combat)
    -   [Red Dragon](#red-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#red-dragon--combat)
    -   [White Dragon](#white-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#white-dragon--combat)
-   [Metallic Dragons](#metallic-dragons)
    -   [Brass Dragon](#brass-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#brass-dragon--combat)
    -   [Bronze Dragon](#bronze-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#bronze-dragon--combat)
    -   [Copper Dragon](#copper-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#copper-dragon--combat)
    -   [Gold Dragon](#gold-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#gold-dragon--combat)
    -   [Silver Dragon](#silver-dragon)
        -   [Combat](#silver-dragon--combat)
-   [Dragon Turtle](#dragon-turtle)
    -   [Combat](#dragon-turtle--combat)
-   [Dragonne](#dragonne)
    -   [Combat](#dragonne--combat)
-   [Drider](#drider)
    -   [Combat](#drider--combat)
-   [Dryad](#dryad)
    -   [Combat](#dryad--combat)
-   [Dwarf](#dwarf)
    -   [Combat](#dwarf--combat)
    -   [Subraces](#subraces)
        -   [Deep Dwarf](#deep-dwarf)
        -   [Duergar](#duergar)
        -   [Mountain Dwarf](#mountain-dwarf)

## Dragon, True

The known varieties of true dragons (as opposed to other creatures that
have the dragon type) fall into two broad categories: chromatic and
metallic. The chromatic dragons are black, blue, green, red, and white;
they are all evil and extremely fierce. The metallic dragons are brass,
bronze, copper, gold, and silver; they are all good, usually noble, and
highly respected by the wise.

All true dragons gain more abilities and greater power as they age.
(Other creatures that have the dragon type do not.) They range in length
from several feet upon hatching to more than 100 feet after attaining
the status of great wyrm. The size of a particular dragon varies
according to age and variety.

A dragon's metabolism operates like a highly efficient furnace and can
metabolize even inorganic material. Some dragons have developed a taste
for such fare.

Although goals and ideals vary among varieties, all dragons are
covetous. They like to hoard wealth, collecting mounds of coins and
gathering as many gems, jewels, and magic items as possible. Those with
large hoards are loath to leave them for long, venturing out of their
lairs only to patrol the immediate area or to get food. For dragons,
there is no such thing as enough treasure. It's pleasing to look at, and
they bask in its radiance. Dragons like to make beds of their hoards,
shaping nooks and mounds to fit their bodies. By the time a dragon
matures to the age of great wyrm, hundreds of gems and coins may be
imbedded in its hide.

All dragons speak Draconic.

### Combat {#dragon-true--combat}

A dragon attacks with its powerful claws and bite, and can also use a
breath weapon and special physical attacks, depending on its size. It
prefers to fight on the wing, staying out of reach until it has worn
down the enemy with ranged attacks. Older, more intelligent dragons are
adept at sizing up the opposition and eliminating the most dangerous
foes first (or avoiding them while picking off weaker enemies).

The table below provides space and reach statistics for dragons of
various sizes, plus the natural weapons a dragon of a certain size can
employ and the damage those attacks deal.

**Bite:** Bite attacks deal the indicated damage plus the dragon's
Strength bonus. A dragon also can use its bite to snatch opponents if it
has the Snatch feat.

**Claw:** Claw attacks deal the indicated damage plus 1/2 the dragon's
Strength bonus (round down). The dragon also can use its claws to snatch
opponents if it has the Snatch feat. Claw attacks are secondary attacks,
requiring a --5 penalty on the attack roll. (Many dragons choose the
Multiattack feat to lessen this penalty to --2).

**Wing:** The dragon can slam opponents with its wings, even when
flying. Wing attacks deal the indicated damage plus 1/2 the dragon's
Strength bonus (round down) and are treated as secondary attacks.

**Tail Slap:** The dragon can slap one opponent each round with its
tail. A tail slap deals the indicated damage plus 1-1/2 times the
dragon's Strength bonus (round down) and is treated as a secondary
attack.

**Crush (Ex):** This special attack allows a flying or jumping dragon of
at least Huge size to land on opponents as a standard action, using its
whole body to crush them. Crush attacks are effective only against
opponents three or more size categories smaller than the dragon (though
it can attempt normal overrun or grapple attacks against larger
opponents).

A crush attack affects as many creatures as can fit under the dragon's
body. Creatures in the affected area must succeed on a Reflex save (DC
equal to that of the dragon's breath weapon) or be pinned, automatically
taking bludgeoning damage during the next round unless the dragon moves
off them. If the dragon chooses to maintain the pin, treat it as a
normal grapple attack. Pinned opponents take damage from the crush each
round if they don't escape.

A crush attack deals the indicated damage plus 1-1/2 times the dragon's
Strength bonus (round down).

**Tail Sweep (Ex):** This special attack allows a dragon of at least
Gargantuan size to sweep with its tail as a standard action. The sweep
affects a half-circle with a radius of 30 feet (or 40 feet for a
Colossal dragon), extending from an intersection on the edge of the
dragon's space in any direction. Creatures within the swept area are
affected if they are four or more size categories smaller than the
dragon. A tail sweep automatically deals the indicated damage plus 1-1/2
times the dragon's Strength bonus (round down). Affected creatures can
attempt Reflex saves to take half damage (DC equal to that of the
dragon's breath weapon).

**Grappling:** Dragons do not favor grapple attacks, though their crush
attack (and Snatch feat, if they know it) use normal grapple rules. A
dragon can always use its breath weapon while grappling, as well as its
spells and spell-like or supernatural abilities, provided it succeeds on
Concentration checks.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** Using a breath weapon is a standard action. Once
a dragon breathes, it can't breathe again until 1d4 rounds later. If a
dragon has more than one type of breath weapon, it still can breathe
only once every 1d4 rounds. A blast from a breath weapon always starts
at any intersection adjacent to the dragon and extends in a direction of
the dragon's choice, with an area as noted on the table below. If the
breath weapon deals damage, creatures caught in the area can attempt
Reflex saves to take half damage; the DC depends on the dragon's age and
variety, and is given in each individual entry. Saves against
nondamaging breath weapons use the same DC; the kind of saving throw is
noted in the variety descriptions. The save DC against a breath weapon
is 10 + 1/2 dragon's HD + dragon's Con modifier.

Breath weapons come in two basic shapes, line and cone, whose areas vary
with the dragon's size.

  ------------------------------------------------- ----------------- -------------------
  Dragon Breath Weapons                                               
  Dragon Size                                       Line\* (Length)   Cone\*\* (Length)
  Tiny                                              30 ft.            15 ft.
  Small                                             40 ft.            20 ft.
  Medium                                            60 ft.            30 ft.
  Large                                             80 ft.            40 ft.
  Huge                                              100 ft.           50 ft.
  Gargantuan                                        120 ft.           60 ft.
  Colossal                                          140 ft.           70 ft.
  \*A line is always 5 feet high and 5 feet wide.                     
  \*\*A cone is as high and wide as its length.                       
  ------------------------------------------------- ----------------- -------------------

**Frightful Presence (Ex):** A young adult or older dragon can unsettle
foes with its mere presence. The ability takes effect automatically
whenever the dragon attacks, charges, or flies overhead. Creatures
within a radius of 30 feet x the dragon's age category are subject to
the effect if they have fewer HD than the dragon. A potentially affected
creature that succeeds on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 dragon's HD +
dragon's Cha modifier) remains immune to that dragon's frightful
presence for 24 hours. On a failure, creatures with 4 or less HD become
panicked for 4d6 rounds and those with 5 or more HD become shaken for
4d6 rounds. Dragons ignore the frightful presence of other dragons.

**Spells:** A dragon knows and casts arcane spells as a sorcerer of the
level indicated in its variety description, gaining bonus spells for a
high Charisma score. Some dragons can also cast spells from the cleric
list or cleric domain lists as arcane spells.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** A dragon's spell-like abilities depend on its
age and variety. It gains the abilities indicated for its age plus all
previous ones. Its age category or its sorcerer caster level, whichever
is higher, is the caster level for these abilities. The save DC is 10 +
dragon's Cha modifier + spell level. All spell-like abilities are usable
once per day unless otherwise noted.

**Damage Reduction:** Young adult and older dragons have damage
reduction. Their natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for the
purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Immunities (Ex):** All dragons have immunity to *sleep* and paralysis
effects. Each variety of dragon has immunity to one or two additional
forms of attack no matter what its age, as given in its description.

**Spell Resistance (Ex):** As dragons age, they become more resistant to
spells and spell-like abilities, as indicated in the variety
descriptions.

**Blindsense (Ex):** Dragons can pinpoint creatures within a distance of
60 feet. Opponents the dragon can't actually see still have total
concealment against the dragon.

**Keen Senses (Ex):** A dragon sees four times as well a human in
shadowy illumination and twice as well in normal light. It also has
darkvision out to 120 feet.

**Skills:** All dragons have skill points equal to (6 + Int modifier,
minimum 1) x (Hit Dice + 3). Most dragons purchase the following skills
at the maximum ranks possible: Listen, Search, and Spot. The remaining
skill points are generally spent on Concentration, Diplomacy, Escape
Artist, Intimidate, Knowledge (any), Sense Motive, and Use Magic Device
at a cost of 1 skill point per rank. All these skills are considered
class skills for dragons. (Each dragon has other class skills as well,
as noted in the variety descriptions.)

**Feats:** All dragons have one feat, plus additional feats based on Hit
Dice just like any other creature. Dragons favor Alertness, Blind-Fight,
Cleave, Flyby Attack, Hover, Improved Initiative, Improved Sunder, Power
Attack, Snatch, Weapon Focus (claw or bite), Wingover, and any metamagic
feat that is available and useful to sorcerers.

  ----------------------- ---------------
  Dragon Age Categories   
  Category                Age (Years)
  1 Wyrmling              0--5
  2 Very young            6--15
  3 Young                 16--25
  4 Juvenile              26--50
  5 Young adult           51--100
  6 Adult                 101--200
  7 Mature adult          201--400
  8 Old                   401--600
  9 Very old              601--800
  10 Ancient              801--1,000
  11 Wyrm                 1,001--1,200
  12 Great wyrm           1,201 or more
  ----------------------- ---------------

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------- --------- --------- ------------- -------- --------------
  Dragon Space/Reach, Attacks, and Damage                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
  Size                                                                                                                                                             Space/Reach\*                       1 Bite   2 Claws   2 Wings   1 Tail Slap   1Crush   1 Tail Sweep
  Tiny                                                                                                                                                             2-1/2 ft./0 ft. (5 ft. with bite)   1d4      1d3       ---       ---           ---      ---
  Small                                                                                                                                                            5 ft./5 ft.                         1d6      1d4       ---       ---           ---      ---
  Medium                                                                                                                                                           5 ft./5 ft.                         1d8      1d6       1d4       ---           ---      ---
  Large                                                                                                                                                            10 ft./5 ft. (10 ft. with bite)     2d6      1d8       1d6       1d8           ---      ---
  Huge                                                                                                                                                             15 ft./10 ft. (15 ft. with bite)    2d8      2d6       1d8       2d6           2d8      ---
  Gargantuan                                                                                                                                                       20 ft./15 ft. (20 ft. with bite)    4d6      2d8       2d6       2d8           4d6      2d6
  Colossal                                                                                                                                                         30 ft./20 ft. (30 ft. with bite)    4d8      4d6       2d8       4d6           4d8      2d8
  \*A dragon's bite attack has reach as if the creature were one size category larger. All other attacks are made with the standard reach for the dragon's size.                                                                                           
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------- --------- --------- ------------- -------- --------------

### Dragon Overland Movement

Chromatic and metallic dragons are exceedingly strong flyers and can
cover vast distances quickly. A dragon's overland flying speed is a
function of its tactical fly speed, as shown on the table below.

  ------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- -----------
  Dragon Overland Flying Speeds                                                                                                                                                                          
                                  []{style="                                                                                                                                                             
                                                  display: block;                                                                                                                                        
                                                  position: absolute;                                                                                                                                    
                                                  right: 0;                                                                                                                                              
                                                  top: 50%;                                                                                                                                              
                                                  left: 0px;                                                                                                                                             
                                                  border-top: 1px solid currentColor;                                                                                                                    
                                                "}[Dragon's Fly Speed ]{style="background-color: #fff; display: inline-block; z-index: 1; position: relative; padding: 0 8px"}                           
                                  100 feet                                                                                                                                       150 feet    200 feet    250 feet
  One Hour                                                                                                                                                                                               
  Normal                          15 miles                                                                                                                                       20 miles    30 miles    40 miles
  Hustle                          24 miles                                                                                                                                       40 miles    60 miles    80 miles
  One Day                                                                                                                                                                                                
  Normal                          120 miles                                                                                                                                      160 miles   240 miles   320 miles
  ------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------- ----------- -----------

Dragons do not tire as quickly as other creatures when moving overland
on the ground. If a dragon attempts a hustle or a forced march, check
for nonlethal damage once every 2 hours instead of every hour.

### Dragonhide

Armorsmiths can work with the hides of dragons to produce armor or
shields of masterwork quality.

## Chromatic Dragons

Chromatic dragons form the evil branch of dragonkind. They are
aggressive, greedy, vain, and nasty.

### Black Dragon

**Dragon (Water)**

**Environment:** Warm marshes

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Rating:** Wyrmling 3; very young 4; young 5; juvenile 7;
young adult 9; adult 11; mature adult 14; old 16; very old 18; ancient
19; wyrm 20; great wyrm 22

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always chaotic evil

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 5--6 HD; very young 8--9 HD; young 11--12 HD;
juvenile 14--15 HD; young adult 17--18 HD; adult 20--21 HD; mature adult
23--24 HD; old 26--27 HD; very old 29--30 HD; ancient 32--33 HD; wyrm
35--36 HD; great wyrm 38+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +3; very young +3; young +3; juvenile +4;
others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Black                                                                                                               
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   T      4d12+4 (30) 11    10    13    8     11    8     +4/--4     +6       +5     +4     +4     2d4 (13) ---

  Very young S      7d12+7 (52) 13    10    13    8     11    8     +7/+4      +9       +6     +5     +5     4d4 (14) ---

  Young      M      10d12+20    15    10    15    10    11    10    +10/+12    +12      +9     +7     +7     6d4 (17) ---
                    (85)                                                                                              

  Juvenile   M      13d12+26    17    10    15    10    11    10    +13/+16    +16      +10    +8     +8     8d4 (18) ---
                    (110)                                                                                             

  Young      L      16d12+48    19    10    17    12    13    12    +16/+24    +19      +13    +10    +11    10d4     19
  adult             (152)                                                                                    (21)     

  Adult      L      19d12+76    23    10    19    12    13    12    +19/+29    +24      +15    +11    +12    12d4     20
                    (199)                                                                                    (23)     

  Mature     H      22d12+110   27    10    21    14    15    14    +22/+38    +28      +18    +13    +15    14d4     23
  adult             (253)                                                                                    (26)     

  Old        H      25d12+125   29    10    21    14    15    14    +25/+42    +32      +19    +14    +16    16d4     24
                    (287)                                                                                    (27)     

  Very old   H      28d12+168   31    10    23    16    17    16    +28/+46    +36      +22    +16    +19    18d4     27
                    (350)                                                                                    (30)     

  Ancient    H      31d12+186   33    10    23    16    17    16    +31/+50    +40      +23    +17    +20    20d4     28
                    (387)                                                                                    (31)     

  Wyrm       G      34d12+238   35    10    25    18    19    18    +34/+58    +42      +26    +19    +23    22d4     31
                    (459)                                                                                    (34)     

  Great wyrm G      37d12+296   37    10    27    20    21    20    +37/+62    +46      +28    +20    +25    24d4     33
                    (536)                                                                                    (36)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- ------------ ---------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Black Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                     
  Age                             Speed                                        Initiative   AC                                                   Special Abilities                   Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                        60 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), swim 60 ft.   +0           15 (+2 size,+3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 15    Immunity to acid, water breathing   ---            ---
  Very young                      60 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), swim 60 ft.   +0           17 (+1 size,+6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 17                                        ---            ---
  Young                           60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           19 (+9 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19                                                ---            ---
  Juvenile                        60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           22 (+12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 22           Darkness                            ---            ---
  Young adult                     60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           24 (--1 size,+15 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 24   DR 5/magic                          1st            17
  Adult                           60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           27 (--1 size,+18 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 27   Corrupt water                       3rd            18
  Mature adult                    60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           29 (--2 size,+21 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 29   DR 10/magic                         5th            21
  Old                             60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           32 (--2 size,+24 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 32   Plant growth                        7th            22
  Very old                        60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           35 (--2 size,+27 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 35   DR 15/magic                         9th            23
  Ancient                         60 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           38 (--2 size,+30 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 38   Insect plague                       11th           25
  Wyrm                            60 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           39 (--4 size,+33 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 39   DR 20/magic                         13th           26
  Great wyrm                      60 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           42 (--4 size,+36 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 42   Charm reptiles                      15th           28
  ------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- ------------ ---------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------- -----

Black dragon are sometimes known as skull dragons because of their
skeletal faces. Adding to the skeletal impression is the gradual
deterioration of the hide around the base of the horn and the
cheekbones. This deterioration increases with age and does not harm the
dragon. On hatching, a black dragon's scales are thin, small, and
glossy. As the dragon ages, they become larger, thicker, and duller,
helping it camouflage itself in swamps and marshes.

Black dragons are especially fond of coins. Older dragons sometimes
capture and question humanoids about stockpiles of gold, silver, and
platinum coins before killing them.

#### Combat {#black-dragon--combat}

Black dragons prefer to ambush their targets, using their surroundings
as cover. When fighting in heavily forested swamps and marshes, they try
to stay in the water or on the ground; trees and leafy canopies limit
their aerial maneuverability. When outmatched, a black dragon attempts
to fly out of sight, so as not to leave tracks, and hide in a deep pond
or bog.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A black dragon has one type of breath weapon, a
line of acid.

**Water Breathing (Ex):** A black dragon can breathe underwater
indefinitely and can freely use its breath weapon, spells, and other
abilities while submerged.

***Corrupt Water* (Sp):** Once per day an adult or older black dragon
can stagnate 10 cubic feet of water, making it become still, foul, and
unable to support animal life. The ability spoils liquids containing
water. Magic items (such as potions) and items in a creature's
possession must succeed on a Will save (DC equal to that of the dragon's
frightful presence) or become fouled. This ability is the equivalent of
a 1st-level spell. Its range is equal to that of the dragon's frightful
presence.

***Charm Reptiles* (Sp):** A great wyrm black dragon can use this
ability three times per day. It works as a *mass charm* spell that
affects only reptilian animals. The dragon can communicate with any
charmed reptiles as though casting a *speak with animals* spell. This
ability is the equivalent of a 1st-level spell.

**Other Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*darkness* (juvenile or older;
radius 10 feet per age category), *insect plague* (ancient or older);
1/day---*plant growth* (old or older).

**Skills:** Hide, Move Silently, and Swim are considered class skills
for black dragons.

### Blue Dragon

**Dragon (Earth)**

**Environment:** Temperate deserts

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 3; very young 4; young 6; juvenile 8;
young adult 11; adult 14; mature adult 16; old 18; very old 19; ancient
21; wyrm 23; great wyrm 25

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always lawful evil

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 7--8 HD; very young 10--11 HD; young 13--14
HD; juvenile 16--17 HD; young adult 19--20 HD; adult 22--23 HD; mature
adult 25--26 HD; old 28--29 HD; very old 31--32 HD; ancient 34--35 HD;
wyrm 37--38 HD; great wyrm 40+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +4; very young +4; young +5; others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Blue                                                                                                                
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   S      6d12+6 (45) 13    10    13    10    11    10    +6/+3      +8       +6     +5     +5     2d8 (14) ---

  Very young M      9d12+18     15    10    15    10    11    10    +9/+11     +11      +8     +6     +6     4d8 (16) ---
                    (76)                                                                                              

  Young      M      12d12+24    17    10    15    12    13    12    +12/+15    +15      +10    +8     +9     6d8 (18) ---
                    (102)                                                                                             

  Juvenile   L      15d12+45    19    10    17    14    15    14    +15/+23    +18      +12    +9     +11    8d8 (20) ---
                    (142)                                                                                             

  Young      L      18d12+72    23    10    19    14    15    14    +18/+28    +23      +15    +11    +13    10d8     21
  adult             (189)                                                                                    (23)     

  Adult      H      21d12+105   27    10    21    16    17    16    +21/+37    +27      +17    +12    +15    12d8     23
                    (241)                                                                                    (25)     

  Mature     H      24d12+120   29    10    21    16    17    16    +24/+41    +31      +19    +14    +17    14d8     25
  adult             (276)                                                                                    (27)     

  Old        H      27d12+162   31    10    23    18    19    18    +27/+45    +35      +21    +15    +19    16d8     27
                    (337)                                                                                    (29)     

  Very old   H      30d12+180   33    10    23    18    19    18    +30/+49    +39      +23    +17    +21    18d8     29
                    (375)                                                                                    (31)     

  Ancient    G      33d12+231   35    10    25    20    21    20    +33/+57    +41      +25    +18    +23    20d8     31
                    (445)                                                                                    (33)     

  Wyrm       G      36d12+288   37    10    27    20    21    20    +36/+61    +45      +28    +20    +25    22d8     33
                    (522)                                                                                    (36)     

  Great wyrm G      39d12+312   39    10    27    22    23    22    +39/+65    +49      +29    +21    +27    24d8     35
                    (565)                                                                                    (37)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Blue Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Age                                                                                             Speed                                          Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                                 Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                        40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 100 ft. (average)   +0           16 (+1 size, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16    Immunity to electricity, *create/destroy water*   ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                      40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18                                                               ---            ---
  Young                                                                                           40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           21 (+11 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 21                                                              ---            ---
  Juvenile                                                                                        40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           23 (--1 size, +14 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 23   Sound imitation                                   1st            ---
  Young adult                                                                                     40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           26 (--1 size, +17 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 26   DR 5/magic                                        3rd            19
  Adult                                                                                           40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           28 (--2 size, +20 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 28   Ventriloquism                                     5th            21
  Mature adult                                                                                    40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           31 (--2 size, +23 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 31   DR 10/magic                                       7th            22
  Old                                                                                             40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           34 (--2 size, +26 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 34   Hallucinatory terrain                             9th            24
  Very old                                                                                        40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           37 (--2 size, +29 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 37   DR 15/magic                                       11th           25
  Ancient                                                                                         40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           38 (--4 size, +32 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 38   Veil                                              13th           27
  Wyrm                                                                                            40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           41 (--4 size, +35 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 41   DR 20/magic                                       15th           29
  Great wyrm                                                                                      40 ft., burrow 20 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           44 (--4 size, +38 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 44   Mirage arcana                                     17th           31
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Air, Evil, and Law domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                                                      
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----

A blue dragon's scales vary in color from an iridescent azure to a deep
indigo, polished to a glossy finish by blowing desert sands. The size of
its scales increases little as the dragon ages, although they do become
thicker and harder. Its hide tends to hum and crackle faintly with
built-up static electricity. These effects intensify when the dragon is
angry or about to attack, giving off an odor of ozone and sand. Their
vibrant color makes blue dragons easy to spot in barren desert
surroundings. However, they often burrow into the sand so only part of
their heads are exposed.

Blue dragons love to soar in the hot desert air, usually flying in the
daytime when temperatures are highest. Some nearly match the color of
the desert sky and use this coloration to their advantage.

Blue dragons lair in vast underground caverns, where they also store
their treasure. Although they collect anything that looks valuable, they
are most fond of gems---especially sapphires.

#### Combat {#blue-dragon--combat}

Typically, blue dragons attack from above or burrow beneath the sands
until opponents come within 100 feet. Older dragons use their special
abilities, such as *hallucinatory terrain*, in concert with these
tactics to mask the land and improve their chances to surprise the
target. Blue dragons run from a fight only if they are severely damaged,
since they view retreat as cowardly.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A blue dragon has one type of breath weapon, a
line of lightning.

***Create/Destroy Water* (Sp):** A blue dragon of any age can use this
ability three times per day. It works like the *create water* spell,
except that the dragon can decide to destroy water instead of creating
it, which automatically spoils unattended liquids containing water.
Magic items (such as potions) and items in a creature's possession must
succeed on a Will save (DC equal to that of the dragon's frightful
presence) or be ruined. This ability is the equivalent of a 1st-level
spell.

**Sound Imitation (Ex):** A juvenile or older blue dragon can mimic any
voice or sound it has heard, anytime it likes. Listeners must succeed on
a Will save (DC equal to that of the dragon's frightful presence) to
detect the ruse.

**Other Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*ventriloquism* (adult or
older); 1/day---*hallucinatory terrain* (old or older), *veil* (ancient
or older), *mirage arcana* (great wyrm).

**Skills:** Bluff, Hide, and Spellcraft are considered class skills for
blue dragons.

### Green Dragon

**Dragon (Air)**

**Environment:** Temperate forests

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 3; very young 4; young 5; juvenile 8;
young adult 11; adult 13; mature adult 16; old 18; very old 19; ancient
21; wyrm 22; great wyrm 24

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always lawful evil

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 6--7 HD; very young 9--10 HD; young 12--13 HD;
juvenile 15--16 HD; young adult 18--19 HD; adult 21--22 HD; mature adult
24--25 HD; old 27--28 HD; very old 30--31 HD; ancient 33--34 HD; wyrm
36--37 HD; great wyrm 39+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +5; very young +5; young +5; juvenile +6;
others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Green                                                                                                               
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   S      5d12+5 (37) 13    10    13    10    11    10    +5/+2      +7       +5     +4     +4     2d6 (13) ---

  Very young M      8d12+16     15    10    15    10    11    10    +8/+10     +10      +8     +6     +6     4d6 (16) ---
                    (68)                                                                                              

  Young      M      11d12+22    17    10    15    12    13    12    +11/+14    +14      +9     +7     +8     6d6 (17) ---
                    (93)                                                                                              

  Juvenile   L      14d12+42    19    10    17    14    15    14    +14/+22    +17      +12    +9     +11    8d6 (20) ---
                    (133)                                                                                             

  Young      L      17d12+68    23    10    19    14    15    14    +17/+27    +22      +14    +10    +12    10d6     20
  adult             (178)                                                                                    (22)     

  Adult      H      20d12+100   27    10    21    16    17    16    +20/+36    +26      +17    +12    +15    12d6     23
                    (230)                                                                                    (25)     

  Mature     H      23d12+115   29    10    21    16    17    16    +23/+40    +30      +18    +13    +16    14d6     24
  adult             (264)                                                                                    (26)     

  Old        H      26d12+156   31    10    23    18    19    18    +26/+44    +34      +21    +15    +19    16d6     27
                    (325)                                                                                    (29)     

  Very old   H      29d12+174   33    10    23    18    19    18    +29/+48    +38      +22    +16    +20    18d6     28
                    (362)                                                                                    (30)     

  Ancient    G      32d12+224   35    10    25    20    21    20    +32/+56    +40      +25    +18    +23    20d6     31
                    (432)                                                                                    (33)     

  Wyrm       G      35d12+280   37    10    27    20    21    20    +35/+60    +44      +27    +19    +24    22d6     32
                    (507)                                                                                    (35)     

  Great wyrm G      38d12+304   39    10    27    22    23    22    +38/+64    +48      +29    +21    +27    24d6     35
                    (551)                                                                                    (37)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ------------------------------- ------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Green Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                     
  Age                             Speed                                       Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                   Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                        40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), swim 40 ft   +0           15 (+1 size, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15    Immunity to acid, water breathing   ---            ---
  Very young                      40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           17 (+7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 17                                                 ---            ---
  Young                           40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           20 (+10 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 20                                                ---            ---
  Juvenile                        40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           22 (--1 size, +13 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 22   1st                                 ---            
  Young adult                     40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           25 (--1 size, +16 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 25   DR 5/magic                          3rd            19
  Adult                           40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           27 (--2 size, +19 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 27   Suggestion                          5th            21
  Mature adult                    40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           30 (--2 size, +22 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 30   DR 10/magic                         7th            22
  Old                             40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           33 (--2 size, +25 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 33   Plant growth                        9th            24
  Very old                        40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 40 ft      +0           36 (--2 size, +28 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 36   DR 15/magic                         11th           25
  Ancient                         40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 40 ft    +0           37 (--4 size, +31 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 37   Dominate person                     13th           27
  Wyrm                            40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 40 ft    +0           40 (--4 size, +34 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 40   DR 20/magic                         15th           28
  Great wyrm                      40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 40 ft    +0           43 (--4 size, +37 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 43   Command plants                      17th           30
  ------------------------------- ------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------- -----

A wyrmling green dragon's scales are thin, very small, and a deep shade
of green that appears nearly black. As the dragon ages, the scales grow
larger and lighter, turning shades of forest, emerald, and olive green,
which helps it blend in with its wooded surroundings.

#### Combat {#green-dragon--combat}

Green dragons initiate fights with little or no provocation, picking on
creatures of any size. If the target is intriguing or seems formidable,
the dragon stalks the creature to determine the best time to strike and
the most appropriate tactics to use. If the target appears weak, the
dragon makes its presence known quickly---it enjoys

evoking terror. Sometimes the dragon elects to control a humanoid
creature through intimidation and *suggestion.* Green dragons especially
like to question adventurers to learn more about their society and
abilities, what is going on in the countryside, and if there is treasure
nearby.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A green dragon has one type of breath weapon, a
cone of corrosive (acid) gas.

**Water Breathing (Ex):** A green dragon can breathe underwater
indefinitely and can freely use its breath weapon, spells, and other
abilities while submerged.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*suggestion* (adult or older),
*dominate person* (ancient or older); 1/day--- *plant growth* (old or
older), *command plants* (great wyrm).

**Skills:** Bluff, Hide, and Move Silently are considered class skills
for green dragons.

### Red Dragon

**Dragon (Fire)**

**Environment:** Warm mountains

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 4; very young 5; young 7; juvenile 10;
young adult 13; adult 15; mature adult 18; old 20; very old 21; ancient
23; wyrm 24; great wyrm 26

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always chaotic evil

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 8--9 HD; very young 11--12 HD; young 14--15
HD; juvenile 17--18 HD; young adult 20--21 HD; adult 23--24 HD; mature
adult 26--27 HD; old 29--30 HD; very old 32--33 HD; ancient 35--36 HD;
wyrm 38--39 HD; great wyrm 41+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +4; very young +5; young +6; others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Red                                                                                                                 
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   M      7d12+14     17    10    15    10    11    10    +7/+10     +10      +7     +5     +5     2d10     ---
                    (59)                                                                                     (15)     

  Very young L      10d12+30    21    10    17    12    13    12    +10/+19    +14      +10    +7     +8     4d10     ---
                    (95)                                                                                     (18)     

  Young      L      13d12+39    25    10    17    12    13    12    +13/+24    +19      +11    +8     +9     6d10     ---
                    (123)                                                                                    (19)     

  Juvenile   L      16d12+64    29    10    19    14    15    14    +16/+29    +24      +14    +10    +12    8d10     ---
                    (168)                                                                                    (22)     

  Young      H      19d12+95    31    10    21    14    15    14    +19/+37    +27      +16    +11    +13    10d10    21
  adult             (218)                                                                                    (24)     

  Adult      H      22d12+110   33    10    21    16    19    16    +22/+41    +31      +18    +13    +17    12d10    24
                    (253)                                                                                    (26)     

  Mature     H      25d12+150   33    10    23    18    19    18    +25/+44    +34      +20    +14    +18    14d10    26
  adult             (312)                                                                                    (28)     

  Old        G      28d12+196   35    10    25    20    21    20    +28/+52    +36      +23    +16    +21    16d10    29
                    (378)                                                                                    (31)     

  Very old   G      31d12+248   37    10    27    22    23    22    +31/+56    +40      +25    +17    +23    18d10    31
                    (449)                                                                                    (33)     

  Ancient    G      34d12+306   39    10    29    24    25    24    +34/+60    +44      +28    +19    +26    20d10    34
                    (527)                                                                                    (36)     

  Wyrm       G      37d12+370   41    10    31    24    25    24    +37/+64    +48      +30    +20    +27    22d10    35
                    (610)                                                                                    (38)     

  Great wyrm C      40d12+400   45    10    31    26    27    26    +40/+73    +49      +32    +22    +30    24d10    38
                    (660)                                                                                    (40)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------ ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Red Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
  Age                                                                                                Speed                          Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                         Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                           40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           16 (+6 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 16             Immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold   ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                         40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           18 (--1 size, +9 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18                                              ---            ---
  Young                                                                                              40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           21 (--1 size, +12 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 21                                             1st            ---
  Juvenile                                                                                           40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           24 (--1 size, +15 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 24   Locate object                             3rd            ---
  Young adult                                                                                        40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           26 (--2 size, +18 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 26   DR 5/magic                                5th            19
  Adult                                                                                              40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           29 (--2 size, +21 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 29                                             7th            21
  Mature adult                                                                                       40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)     +0           32 (--2 size, +24 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 32   DR 10/magic                               9th            23
  Old                                                                                                40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)   +0           33 (--4 size, +27 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 33   Suggestion                                11th           24
  Very old                                                                                           40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)   +0           36 (--4 size, +30 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 36   DR 15/magic                               13th           26
  Ancient                                                                                            40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)   +0           39 (--4 size, +33 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 39   Find the path                             15th           28
  Wyrm                                                                                               40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)   +0           42 (--4 size, +36 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 42   DR 20/magic                               17th           30
  Great wyrm                                                                                         40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)   +0           41 (--8 size, +39 natural), touch 2, flat-footed 41   Discern location                          19th           32
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Chaos, Evil, and Fire domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                              
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------ ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------- -------------- -----

The small scales of a wyrmling red dragon are a bright glossy scarlet,
making the dragon easily spotted by predators and hunters, so it stays
underground and does not venture outside until it is more able to take
care of itself. Toward the end of young age, the scales turn a deeper
red, and the glossy texture is replaced by a smooth, dull finish. As the
dragon grows older, the scales become large, thick, and as strong as
metal. The neck frill and wings are an ash blue or purple-gray toward
the edges, becoming darker with age. The pupils of a red dragon fade as
it ages; the oldest red dragons have eyes that resemble molten lava
orbs.

#### Combat {#red-dragon--combat}

Because red dragons are so confident, they seldom pause to appraise an
adversary. On spotting a target, they make a snap decision whether to
attack, using one of many strategies worked out ahead of time. A red
dragon lands to attack small, weak creatures with its claws and bite
rather than obliterating them with its breath weapon, so as not to
destroy any treasure they might be carrying.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A red dragon has one type of breath weapon, a
cone of fire.

***Locate Object* (Sp):** A juvenile or older red dragon can use this
ability as the spell of the same name, once per day per age category.

**Other Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*suggestion* (old or older);
1/day---*find the path* (ancient or older), *discern location* (great
wyrm).

**Skills:** Appraise, Bluff, and Jump are considered class skills for
red dragons.

### White Dragon

**Dragon (Cold)**

**Environment:** Cold mountains

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 2; very young 3; young 4; juvenile 6;
young adult 8; adult 10; mature adult 12; old 15; very old 17; ancient
18; wyrm 19; great wyrm 21

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always chaotic evil

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 4--5 HD; very young 7--8 HD; young 10--11 HD;
juvenile 13--14 HD; young adult 16--17 HD; adult 19--20 HD; mature adult
22--23 HD; old 25--26 HD; very old 28--29 HD; ancient 31--32 HD; wyrm
34--35 HD; great wyrm 37+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +2; very young +3; young +3; juvenile +5;
others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  White                                                                                                               
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   T      3d12+3 (22) 11    10    13    6     11    6     +3/--5     +5       +4     +3     +3     1d6 (12) ---

  Very young S      6d12+6 (45) 13    10    13    6     11    6     +6/+3      +8       +6     +5     +5     2d6 (14) ---

  Young      M      9d12+18     15    10    15    6     11    6     +9/+11     +11      +8     +6     +6     3d6 (16) ---
                    (76)                                                                                              

  Juvenile   M      12d12+24    17    10    15    8     11    8     +12/+15    +15      +10    +8     +8     4d6 (18) ---
                    (102)                                                                                             

  Young      L      15d12+45    19    10    17    8     11    10    +15/+23    +18      +12    +9     +9     5d6 (20) 17
  adult             (142)                                                                                             

  Adult      L      18d12+72    23    10    19    10    11    12    +18/+28    +23      +15    +11    +11    6d6 (23) 20
                    (189)                                                                                             

  Mature     H      21d12+105   27    10    21    12    13    12    +21/+37    +27      +17    +12    +13    7d6 (25) 21
  adult             (241)                                                                                             

  Old        H      24d12+120   29    10    21    12    13    12    +24/+41    +31      +19    +14    +15    8d6 (27) 23
                    (276)                                                                                             

  Very old   H      27d12+162   31    10    23    14    15    14    +27/+45    +35      +21    +15    +17    9d6 (29) 25
                    (337)                                                                                             

  Ancient    H      30d12+180   33    10    23    14    15    14    +30/+49    +39      +23    +17    +19    10d6     27
                    (375)                                                                                    (31)     

  Wyrm       G      33d12+231   35    10    25    14    15    16    +33/+57    +41      +25    +18    +20    11d6     29
                    (445)                                                                                    (33)     

  Great wyrm G      36d12+288   37    10    27    18    19    18    +36/+61    +45      +28    +20    +24    12d6     32
                    (522)                                                                                    (36)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  White Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Age                             Speed                                                       Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                                     Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                        60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 150 ft. (average), swim 60 ft.   +0           14 (+2 size, +2 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14    Icewalking, immunity to cold, vulnerability to fire   ---            ---
  Very young                      60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 150 ft. (average), swim 60 ft.   +0           16 (+1 size, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16                                                          ---            ---
  Young                           60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18                                                                   ---            ---
  Juvenile                        60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           21 (+11 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 21            Fog cloud                                             ---            ---
  Young adult                     60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           23 (--1 size, +14 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 23   DR 5/magic                                            ---            16
  Adult                           60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           26 (--1 size, +17 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 26   Gust of wind                                          1st            18
  Mature adult                    60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           28 (--2 size, +20 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 28   DR 10/magic                                           3rd            20
  Old                             60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           31 (--2 size, +23 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 31   Freezing fog                                          5th            21
  Very old                        60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           34 (--2 size, +26 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 34   DR 15/magic                                           7th            23
  Ancient                         60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           37 (--2 size, +29 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 37   Wall of ice                                           9th            24
  Wyrm                            60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           38 (--4 size, +32 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 38   DR 20/magic                                           11th           25
  Great wyrm                      60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           41 (--4 size, +35 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 41   Control weather                                       13th           27
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----

The scales of a wyrmling white dragon glisten like mirrors. As the
dragon ages, the sheen disappears, and by very old age, scales of pale
blue and light gray are mixed in with the white.

#### Combat {#white-dragon--combat}

White dragons prefer sudden assaults, swooping down from aloft or
bursting from beneath water, snow, or ice. They loose their breath
weapon, then try to knock out a single opponent with a follow-up attack.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A white dragon has one type of breath weapon, a
cone of cold.

**Icewalking (Ex):** This ability works like the *spider climb* spell,
but the surfaces the dragon climbs must be icy. It is always in effect.

***Freezing Fog* (Sp):** An old or older white dragon can use this
ability three times per day. It is similar to a *solid fog* spell but
also causes a rime of slippery ice to form on any surface the fog
touches, creating the effect of a *grease* spell. The dragon is immune
to the *grease* effect because of its icewalking ability. This ability
is the equivalent of a 5th-level spell.

**Other Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*fog cloud* (juvenile or older),
*gust of wind* (adult or older), *wall of ice* (ancient or older);
1/day---*control weather* (great wyrm).

**Skills:** Hide, Move Silently, and Swim are considered class skills
for white dragons.

## Metallic Dragons

Metallic dragons make up the good branch of dragonkind, but they are
every bit as aggressive as their evil cousins when threatened or
challenged. They also tend to be covetous and proud.

### Brass Dragon

**Dragon (Fire)**

**Environment:** Warm deserts

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 3; very young 4; young 6; juvenile 8;
young adult 10; adult 12; mature adult 15; old 17; very old 19; ancient
20; wyrm 21; great wyrm 23

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always chaotic good

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 5--6 HD; very young 8--9 HD; young 11--12 HD;
juvenile 14--15 HD; young adult 17--18 HD; adult 20--21 HD; mature adult
23--24 HD; old 26--27 HD; very old 29--30 HD; ancient 32--33 HD; wyrm
35--36 HD; great wyrm 38+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +2; very young +3; young +4; juvenile +4;
others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Brass                                                                                                               
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   T      4d12+4 (30) 11    10    13    10    11    10    +4/--4     +6       +5     +4     +4     1d6 (13) ---

  Very young S      7d12+7 (52) 13    10    13    10    11    10    +7/+4      +9       +6     +5     +5     2d6 (14) ---

  Young      M      10d12+20    15    10    15    12    13    12    +10/+12    +12      +9     +7     +8     3d6 (17) ---
                    (85)                                                                                              

  Juvenile   M      13d12+26    17    10    15    12    13    12    +13/+16    +16      +10    +8     +9     4d6 (18) ---
                    (110)                                                                                             

  Young      L      16d12+48    19    10    17    14    15    14    +16/+24    +19      +13    +10    +12    5d6 (21) 20
  adult             (152)                                                                                             

  Adult      L      19d12+76    23    10    19    14    15    14    +19/+29    +24      +15    +11    +13    6d6 (23) 21
                    (199)                                                                                             

  Mature     H      22d12+110   27    10    21    16    17    16    +22/+38    +28      +18    +13    +16    7d6 (26) 24
  adult             (253)                                                                                             

  Old        H      25d12+125   29    10    21    16    17    16    +25/+42    +32      +19    +14    +17    8d6 (27) 25
                    (287)                                                                                             

  Very old   H      28d12+168   31    10    23    18    19    18    +28/+46    +36      +22    +16    +20    9d6 (30) 28
                    (350)                                                                                             

  Ancient    H      31d12+186   33    10    23    18    19    18    +31/+50    +40      +23    +17    +21    10d6     29
                    (387)                                                                                    (31)     

  Wyrm       G      34d12+238   35    10    25    20    21    20    +34/+58    +42      +26    +19    +24    11d6     32
                    (459)                                                                                    (34)     

  Great wyrm G      37d12+296   37    10    27    20    21    20    +37/+62    +46      +28    +20    +25    12d6     33
                    (536)                                                                                    (36)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------- ------------ -------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Brass Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  Age                                                                                              Speed                                          Initiative   AC                                                       Special Abilities                                               Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                         60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 150 ft. (average)   +0           15 (+2 size, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 15       Immunity to fire, *speak with animals,* vulnerability to cold   ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                       60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 150 ft. (average)   +0           17 (+1 size, +6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 17                                                                       ---            ---
  Young                                                                                            60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           19 (+9 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19                                                                                1st            ---
  Juvenile                                                                                         60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           22 (+12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 22               Endure elements                                                 3rd            ---
  Young adult                                                                                      60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           24 (--1 size, +15 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 24      DR 5/magic                                                      5th            18
  Adult                                                                                            60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           27 (--1 size, +18 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 27      Suggestion                                                      7th            20
  Mature adult                                                                                     60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           29 (--2 size, +21 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 29      DR 10/magic                                                     9th            22
  Old                                                                                              60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           32 (--2 size, +24 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 32      Control winds                                                   11th           24
  Very old                                                                                         60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           35 (--2 size, +27 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 35 DR   15/magic                                                        13th           25
  Ancient                                                                                          60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor)      +0           38 (--2 size, +30 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 38      Control weather                                                 15th           27
  Wyrm                                                                                             60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy)    +0           39 (--4 size, +33 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 39      DR 20/magic                                                     17th           28
  Great wyrm                                                                                       60 ft., burrow 30 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy)    +0           42 (--4 size, +36 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 42      Summon djinni                                                   19th           30
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Chaos and Knowledge domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------- ------------ -------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----

At birth, a brass dragon's scales are a dull, mottled brown. As the
dragon gets older, the scales become more brassy until they reach a
warm, burnished appearance. The grand head-plates of a brass dragon are
smooth and metallic, and it sports bladed chin horns that grow sharper
with age. Wings and frills are mottled green toward the edges, darkening
with age. As the dragon grows older, its pupils fade until the eyes
resemble molten metal orbs.

#### Combat {#brass-dragon--combat}

Brass dragons would rather talk than fight. If an intelligent creature
tries to leave without engaging in conversation, the dragon might force
compliance in a fit of pique, using *suggestion* or a dose of *sleep*
gas. A creature put to sleep may wake to find itself pinned or buried to
the neck in the sand until the dragon's thirst for small talk is slaked.
When faced with real danger, younger brass dragons fly out of sight,
then hide by burrowing into the sand. Older dragons spurn this ploy but
still prefer to have the advantage in combat.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A brass dragon has two types of breath weapon, a
line of fire and a cone of *sleep*. Creatures within the cone must
succeed on a Will save or fall asleep, regardless of HD, for 1d6 rounds
plus 1 round per age category of the dragon.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*speak with animals;*
3/day---*endure elements* (juvenile or older; radius 10 ft. x dragon's
age category); 1/day---*suggestion* (adult or older), *control winds*
(old or older), *control weather* (ancient or older).

***Summon Djinni* (Sp):** This ability, usable by a great wyrm brass
dragon, works like a *summon monster* spell, except that it summons one
djinni. This ability is the equivalent of a 7th-level spell.

Skills: Bluff, Gather Information, and Survival are considered class
skills for brass dragons.

### Bronze Dragon

**Dragon (Water)**

**Environment:** Temperate hills

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 3; very young 5; young 7; juvenile 9;
young adult 12; adult 15; mature adult 17; old 19; very old 20; ancient
22; wyrm 23; great wyrm 25

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always lawful good

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 7--8 HD; very young 10--11 HD; young 13--14
HD; juvenile 16--17 HD; young adult 19--20 HD; adult 22--23 HD; mature
adult 25--26 HD; old 28--29 HD; very old 31--32 HD; ancient 34--35 HD;
wyrm 37--38 HD; great wyrm 40+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +4; very young +4; young +6; others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Bronze                                                                                                              
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   S      6d12+6 (45) 13    10    13    14    15    14    +6/+3      +8       +6     +5     +7     2d6 (14) ---

  Very young M      9d12+18     15    10    15    14    15    14    +9/+11     +11      +8     +6     +8     4d6 (16) ---
                    (76)                                                                                              

  Young      M      12d12+24    17    10    15    16    17    16    +12/+15    +15      +10    +8     +11    6d6 (18) ---
                    (102)                                                                                             

  Juvenile   L      15d12+45    19    10    17    18    19    18    +15/+23    +18      +12    +9     +13    8d6 (20) ---
                    (142)                                                                                             

  Young      L      18d12+72    23    10    19    18    19    18    +18/+28    +23      +15    +11    +15    10d6     23
  adult             (189)                                                                                    (23)     

  Adult      H      21d12+105   27    10    21    20    21    20    +21/+37    +27      +17    +12    +17    12d6     25
                    (241)                                                                                    (25)     

  Mature     H      24d12+120   29    10    21    20    21    20    +24/+41    +31      +19    +14    +19    14d6     27
  adult             (276)                                                                                    (27)     

  Old        H      27d12+162   31    10    23    22    23    22    +27/+45    +35      +21    +15    +21    16d6     29
                    (337)                                                                                    (29)     

  Very old   H      30d12+180   33    10    23    22    23    22    +30/+49    +39      +23    +17    +23    18d6     31
                    (375)                                                                                    (31)     

  Ancient    G      33d12+231   35    10    25    24    25    24    +33/+57    +41      +25    +18    +25    20d6     33
                    (445)                                                                                    (33)     

  Wyrm       G      36d12+288   37    10    27    26    27    26    +36/+61    +45      +28    +20    +28    22d6     36
                    (522)                                                                                    (36)     

  Great wyrm G      39d12+312   39    10    27    26    27    26    +39/+65    +49      +29    +21    +29    24d6     37
                    (565)                                                                                    (37)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Bronze Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  Age                                                                                                 Speed                                        Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                                                Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                            40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average), swim 60 ft.   +0           16 (+1 size, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16    Immunity to electricity, water breathing, *speak with animals*   ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                          40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           18 (+8 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 18                                                                              ---            ---
  Young                                                                                               40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           21 (+11 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 21            Alternate form                                                   1st            ---
  Juvenile                                                                                            40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           23 (--1 size, +14 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 23                                                                    3rd            ---
  Young adult                                                                                         40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           26 (--1 size, +17 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 26   DR 5/magic                                                       5th            20
  Adult                                                                                               40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           28 (--2 size, +20 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 28   Create food and water, fog cloud                                 7th            22
  Mature adult                                                                                        40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           31 (--2 size, +23 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 31   DR 10/magic                                                      9th            23
  Old                                                                                                 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           34 (--2 size, +26 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 34   Detect thoughts                                                  11th           25
  Very old                                                                                            40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.      +0           37 (--2 size, +29 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 37   DR 15/magic                                                      13th           26
  Ancient                                                                                             40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           38 (--4 size, +32 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 38   Control water                                                    15th           28
  Wyrm                                                                                                40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           41 (--4 size, +35 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 41   DR 20/magic                                                      17th           29
  Great wyrm                                                                                          40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.    +0           44 (--4 size, +38 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 44   Control weather                                                  19th           31
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Animal, Law, and Water domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                                                                   
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----

A bronze wyrmling's scales are yellow tinged with green, showing only a
hint of bronze. As the dragon approaches adulthood, its color deepens
slowly to a darker, rich bronze tone. Very old dragons develop a
blue-black tint to the edges of their scales. Powerful swimmers, they
have webbed feet and smooth, flat scales. The pupils of its eyes fade as
a dragon ages, until in the oldest the eyes resemble glowing green orbs.

#### Combat {#bronze-dragon--combat}

Bronze dragons dislike killing animals and would rather bribe them
(perhaps with food) or force them away magically. They use *detect
thoughts* to learn intelligent creatures' intentions.

When attacking they blind their opponents with *fog cloud* and then
charge or, if flying, snatch them up. Against seafaring opponents they
conjure up a storm or use their tails to smash the vessels' hulls. If a
dragon is inclined to be lenient, ships might be merely becalmed,
fogbound, or broken-masted.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** Bronze dragons have two types of breath weapon,
a line of lightning and a cone of *repulsion* gas. Creatures within the
cone must succeed on a Will save or be compelled to do nothing but move
away from the dragon for 1d6 rounds plus 1 round per age category of the
dragon. This is a mind-affecting compulsion enchantment effect.

**Water Breathing (Ex):** A bronze dragon can breathe underwater
indefinitely and can freely use its breath weapon, spells, and other
abilities while submerged.

**Alternate Form (Su):** A young or older bronze dragon can assume any
animal or humanoid form of Medium size or smaller as a standard action
three times per day. This ability functions as a *polymorph* spell cast
on itself at its caster level, except that the dragon does not regain
hit points for changing form and can only assume the form of an animal
or humanoid. The dragon can remain in its animal or humanoid form until
it chooses to assume a new one or return to its natural form.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*speak with animals;*
3/day---*create food and water* (adult or older), *fog cloud* (adult or
older), *detect thoughts* (old or older), *control water* (ancient or
older); 1/day---*control weather* (great wyrm).

**Skills:** Disguise, Swim, and Survival are considered class skills for
bronze dragons.

### Copper Dragon

**Dragon (Earth)**

**Environment:** Warm hills

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 3; very young 5; young 7; juvenile 9;
young adult 11; adult 14; mature adult 16; old 19; very old 20; ancient
22; wyrm 23; great wyrm 25

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always chaotic good

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 6--7 HD; very young 9--10 HD; young 12--13 HD;
juvenile 15--16 HD; young adult 18--19 HD; adult 21--22 HD; mature adult
24--25 HD; old 27--28 HD; very old 30--31 HD; ancient 33--34 HD; wyrm
36--37 HD; great wyrm 39+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +2; very young +3; young +4; juvenile +4;
others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Copper                                                                                                              
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   T      5d12+5 (37) 11    10    13    12    13    12    +5/--3     +7       +5     +4     +5     2d4 (13) ---

  Very young S      8d12+8 (60) 13    10    13    12    13    12    +8/+5      +10      +7     +6     +7     4d4 (15) ---

  Young      M      11d12+22    15    10    15    14    15    14    +11/+13    +13      +9     +7     +9     6d4 (17) ---
                    (93)                                                                                              

  Juvenile   M      14d12+28    17    10    15    14    15    14    +14/+17    +17      +11    +9     +11    8d4 (19) ---
                    (119)                                                                                             

  Young      L      17d12+51    19    10    17    16    17    16    +17/+25    +20      +13    +10    +13    10d4     21
  adult             (161)                                                                                    (21)     

  Adult      L      20d12+80    23    10    19    16    17    16    +20/+30    +25      +16    +12    +15    12d4     23
                    (210)                                                                                    (24)     

  Mature     H      23d12+115   27    10    21    18    19    18    +23/+39    +29      +18    +13    +17    14d4     25
  adult             (264)                                                                                    (26)     

  Old        H      26d12+130   29    10    21    18    19    18    +26/+43    +33      +20    +15    +19    16d4     27
                    (299)                                                                                    (28)     

  Very old   H      29d12+174   31    10    23    20    21    20    +29/+47    +37      +22    +16    +21    18d4     29
                    (362)                                                                                    (30)     

  Ancient    H      32d12+192   33    10    23    20    21    20    +32/+51    +41      +24    +18    +23    20d4     31
                    (400)                                                                                    (32)     

  Wyrm       G      35d12+245   35    10    25    22    23    22    +35/+59    +43      +26    +19    +25    22d4     33
                    (472)                                                                                    (34)     

  Great wyrm G      38d12+304   37    10    27    22    23    22    +38/+63    +47      +29    +21    +27    24d4     35
                    (551)                                                                                    (37)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Copper Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  Age                                                                                                     Speed                           Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                   Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                                40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average)   +0           16 (+2 size, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 16    Immunity to acid, spider climb      ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                              40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average)   +0           18 (+1 size, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 18                                        ---            ---
  Young                                                                                                   40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           20 (+10 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 20                                                1st            ---
  Juvenile                                                                                                40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           23 (+13 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 23                                                3rd            ---
  Young adult                                                                                             40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           25 (--1 size, +16 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 25   DR 5/magic                          5th            19
  Adult                                                                                                   40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           28 (--1 size, +19 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 28   Stone shape                         7th            21
  Mature adult                                                                                            40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           30 (--2 size, +22 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 30   DR 10/magic                         9th            23
  Old                                                                                                     40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           33 (--2 size, +25 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 33   Transmute rock to mud/mud to rock   11th           25
  Very old                                                                                                40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           36 (--2 size, +28 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 36   DR 15/magic                         13th           26
  Ancient                                                                                                 40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           39 (--2 size, +31 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 39   Wall of stone                       15th           28
  Wyrm                                                                                                    40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           40 (--4 size, +34 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 40   DR 20/magic                         17th           29
  Great wyrm                                                                                              40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           43 (--4 size, +37 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 43   Move earth                          19th           31
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Chaos, Earth, and Trickery domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                         
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------- -------------- -----

At birth, a copper dragon's scales have a ruddy brown color with a
metallic tint. As the dragon gets older, the scales become finer and
more coppery, assuming a soft, warm gloss by young adult age. Very old
dragons' scales pick up a green tint. A copper dragon's pupils fade with
age, and the eyes of great wyrms resemble glowing turquoise orbs.

#### Combat {#copper-dragon--combat}

A copper dragon appreciates wit and usually doesn't harm creatures that
can relate a joke, humorous story, or riddle the dragon has not heard
before. It quickly gets annoyed with anyone who doesn't laugh at its
jokes or accept its tricks with good humor. It likes to taunt and annoy
opponents into giving up or acting foolishly.

An angry copper dragon prefers to mire foes using *transmute rock to
mud*. The dragon pushes trapped opponents into the mud or snatches and
carries them aloft. A copper dragon tries to draw airborne enemies into
narrow, stony gorges where it can use its spider climb ability and
maneuver them into colliding with the walls.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A copper dragon has two types of breath weapon,
a line of acid and a cone of *slow* gas. Creatures within the cone must
succeed on a Fortitude save or be slowed for 1d6 rounds plus 1 round per
age category of the dragon.

**Spider Climb (Ex):** A copper dragon can climb on stone surfaces as
though using the *spider climb* spell.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 2/day---*stone shape* (adult or older);
1/day---*transmute rock to mud* or *mud to rock* (old or older), *wall
of stone* (ancient or older), *move earth* (great wyrm).

**Skills:** Bluff, Hide, and Jump are considered class skills for copper
dragons.

### Gold Dragon

**Dragon (Fire)**

**Environment:** Warm plains

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 5; very young 7; young 9; juvenile 11;
young adult 14; adult 16; mature adult 19; old 21; very old 22; ancient
24; wyrm 25; great wyrm 27

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always lawful good

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 9--10 HD; very young 12--13 HD; young 15--16
HD; juvenile 18--19 HD; young adult 21--22 HD; adult 24--25 HD; mature
adult 27--28 HD; old 30--31 HD; very old 33--34 HD; ancient 36--37 HD;
wyrm 39--40 HD; great wyrm 42+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +4; very young +5; young +6; others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Gold                                                                                                                
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   M      8d12+16     17    10    15    14    15    14    +8/+11     +11      +8     +6     +8     2d10     ---
                    (68)                                                                                     (16)     

  Very young L      11d12+33    21    10    17    16    17    16    +11/+20    +15      +10    +7     +10    4d10     ---
                    (104)                                                                                    (18)     

  Young      L      14d12+42    25    10    17    16    17    16    +14/+25    +20      +12    +9     +12    6d10     ---
                    (133)                                                                                    (20)     

  Juvenile   L      17d12+68    29    10    19    18    19    18    +17/+30    +25      +14    +10    +14    8d10     ---
                    (178)                                                                                    (22)     

  Young      H      20d12+100   31    10    21    18    19    18    +20/+38    +28      +17    +12    +16    10d10    24
  adult             (230)                                                                                    (25)     

  Adult      H      23d12+115   33    10    21    20    21    20    +23/+42    +32      +18    +13    +18    12d10    26
                    (264)                                                                                    (26)     

  Mature     H      26d12+156   35    10    23    20    21    20    +26/+46    +36      +21    +15    +20    14d10    28
  adult             (325)                                                                                    (29)     

  Old        G      29d12+203   39    10    25    24    25    24    +29/+55    +39      +23    +16    +23    16d10    31
                    (391)                                                                                    (31)     

  Very old   G      32d12+256   41    10    27    26    27    26    +32/+59    +43      +26    +18    +26    18d10    34
                    (464)                                                                                    (34)     

  Ancient    G      35d12+315   43    10    29    28    29    28    +35/+63    +47      +28    +19    +28    20d10    36
                    (542)                                                                                    (36)     

  Wyrm       C      38d12+380   45    10    31    30    31    30    +38/+71    +47      +31    +21    +31    22d10    39
                    (627)                                                                                    (39)     

  Great wyrm C      41d12+451   47    10    33    32    33    32    +41/+75    +51      +33    +22    +33    24d10    41
                    (717)                                                                                    (41)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Gold Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
  Age                                                                                              Speed                                       Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                                                          Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                         60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           17 (+7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 17             Alternate form, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold, water breathing   ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                       60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           19 (--1 size, +10 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 19                                                                              ---            ---
  Young                                                                                            60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           22 (--1 size, +13 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 22   1st                                                                        ---            
  Juvenile                                                                                         60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           25 (--1 size, +16 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 25   Bless                                                                      3rd            ---
  Young adult                                                                                      60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           27 (--2 size, +19 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 27   DR 5/magic                                                                 5th            21
  Adult                                                                                            60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           30 (--2 size, +22 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 30   Luck bonus                                                                 7th            23
  Mature adult                                                                                     60 ft., fly 200 ft. (poor), swim 60 ft.     +0           33 (--2 size, +25 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 33   DR 10/magic                                                                9th            25
  Old                                                                                              60 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.   +0           34 (--4 size, +28 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 34   Geas/quest, detect gems                                                    11th           27
  Very old                                                                                         60 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.   +0           37 (--4 size, +31 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 37   DR 15/magic                                                                13th           28
  Ancient                                                                                          60 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.   +0           40 (--4 size, +34 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 40   Sunburst 15th                                                              30             
  Wyrm                                                                                             60 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.   +0           39 (--8 size, +37 natural), touch 2, flat-footed 39   DR 20/magic                                                                17th           31
  Great wyrm                                                                                       60 ft., fly 250 ft. (clumsy), swim 60 ft.   +0           42 (--8 size, +40 natural), touch 2, flat-footed 42   Foresight                                                                  19th           33
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Law, Luck, and Good domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                                                                            
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----

On hatching, a gold dragon's scales are dark yellow with golden metallic
flecks.

The flecks get larger as the dragon matures until, at the adult stage,
the scales are completely golden. Gold dragons' faces are bewhiskered
and sagacious; as they age, their pupils fade until the eyes resemble
pools of molten gold.

#### Combat {#gold-dragon--combat}

Gold dragons usually parley before fighting. When conversing with
intelligent creatures, they use Intimidate and Sense Motive to gain the
upper hand. In combat, they employ *bless* and their *luck bonus;* older
dragons use their *luck bonus* at the start of each day. They make heavy
use of spells in combat. Among their favorites are *cloudkill, delayed
blast fireball, fire shield, globe of invulnerability, maze, sleep,
slow,* and *stinking cloud.*

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A gold dragon has two types of breath weapon, a
cone of fire and a cone of weakening gas. Creatures within a cone of
weakening gas must succeed on a Fortitude save or take 1 point of
Strength damage per age category of the dragon.

**Alternate Form (Su):** A gold dragon can assume any animal or humanoid
form of Medium size or smaller as a standard action three times per day.
This ability functions as a *polymorph* spell cast on itself at its
caster level, except that the dragon does not regain hit points for
changing form and can only assume the form of an animal or humanoid. The
dragon can remain in its animal or humanoid form until it chooses to
assume a new one or return to its natural form.

**Water Breathing (Ex):** A gold dragon can breathe underwater
indefinitely and can freely use its breath weapon, spells, and other
abilities while submerged (the cone of fire becomes a cone of
superheated steam underwater).

***Luck Bonus* (Sp):** Once per day an adult or older gold dragon can
touch a gem, usually one embedded in the dragon's hide, and enspell it
to bring good luck. As long as the dragon carries the gem, it and every
good creature in a 10-foot radius per age category of the dragon
receives a +1 luck bonus on all saving throws and similar rolls, as for
a *stone of good luck*. If the dragon gives an enspelled gem to another
creature, only that bearer gets the bonus. The effect lasts 1d3 hours
plus 3 hours per age category of the dragon but ends if the gem is
destroyed. This ability is the equivalent of a 2nd-level spell.

***Detect Gems* (Sp):** An old or older gold dragon can use this ability
three times per day. This is a divination effect similar to a *detect
magic* spell, except that it finds only gems. The dragon can scan a
60-degree arc each round: By concentrating for 1 round it knows if there
are any gems within the arc; 2 rounds of concentration reveal the exact
number of gems; and 3 rounds reveal their exact location, type, and
value. This ability is the equivalent of a 2ndlevel spell.

**Other Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*bless* (juvenile or older);
1/day---*geas/quest* (old or older), *sunburst* (ancient or older),
*foresight* (great wyrm).

**Skills:** Disguise, Heal, and Swim are considered class skills for
gold dragons.

### Silver Dragon

**Dragon (Cold)**

**Environment:** Temperate mountains

**Organization:** Wyrmling, very young, young, juvenile, and young
adult: solitary or clutch (2--5); adult, mature adult, old, very old,
ancient, wyrm, or great wyrm: solitary, pair, or family (1--2 and 2--5
offspring)

**Challenge Ratings:** Wyrmling 4; very young 5; young 7; juvenile 10;
young adult 13; adult 15; mature adult 18; old 20; very old 21; ancient
23; wyrm 24; great wyrm 26

**Treasure:** Triple standard

**Alignment:** Always lawful good

**Advancement:** Wyrmling 8--9 HD; very young 11--12 HD; young 14--15
HD; juvenile 17--18 HD; young adult 20--21 HD; adult 23--24 HD; mature
adult 26--27 HD; old 29--30 HD; very old 32--33 HD; ancient 35--36 HD;
wyrm 38--39 HD; great wyrm 41+ HD

**Level Adjustment:** Wyrmling +4; very young +4; young +5; others ---

  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------
  Silver                                                                                                              
  Dragons by                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                                 

  Age        Size   Hit Dice    Str   Dex   Con   Int   Wis   Cha   Base       Attack   Fort   Ref    Will   Breath   Frightful
                    (hp)                                            Attack/\            Save   Save   Save   Weapon   Presence DC
                                                                    Grapple                                  (DC)     

  Wyrmling   S      7d12+7 (52) 13    10    13    14    15    14    +7/+4      +9       +6     +5     +7     2d8 (14) ---

  Very young M      10d12+20    15    10    15    14    15    14    +10/+12    +12      +9     +7     +9     4d8 (17) ---
                    (85)                                                                                              

  Young      M      13d12+26    17    10    15    16    17    16    +13/+16    +16      +10    +8     +11    6d8 (18) ---
                    (110)                                                                                             

  Juvenile   L      16d12+48    19    10    17    18    19    18    +16/+24    +19      +13    +10    +14    8d8 (21) ---
                    (152)                                                                                             

  Young      L      19d12+76    23    10    19    18    19    18    +19/+29    +24      +15    +11    +15    10d8     23
  adult             (199)                                                                                    (23)     

  Adult      H      22d12+110   27    10    21    20    21    20    +22/+38    +28      +18    +13    +18    12d8     26
                    (253)                                                                                    (26)     

  Mature     H      25d12+125   29    10    21    20    21    20    +25/+42    +32      +19    +14    +19    14d8     27
  adult             (287)                                                                                    (27)     

  Old        H      28d12+168   31    10    23    22    23    22    +28/+46    +36      +22    +16    +22    16d8     30
                    (350)                                                                                    (30)     

  Very old   H      31d12+186   33    10    23    24    25    24    +31/+50    +40      +23    +17    +24    18d8     32
                    (387)                                                                                    (31)     

  Ancient    G      34d12+238   35    10    25    26    27    26    +34/+58    +42      +26    +19    +27    20d8     35
                    (459)                                                                                    (34)     

  Wyrm       G      37d12+333   39    10    29    28    29    28    +37/+63    +47      +29    +20    +29    22d8     37
                    (573)                                                                                    (37)     

  Great wyrm C      40d12+400   43    10    31    30    31    30    +40/+72    +48      +32    +22    +32    24d8     40
                    (660)                                                                                    (40)     
  ---------- ------ ----------- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- ---------- -------- ------ ------ ------ -------- -----------

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----
  Silver Dragon Abilities by Age                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  Age                                                                                                  Speed                           Initiative   AC                                                    Special Abilities                                                                Caster Level   SR
  Wyrmling                                                                                             40 ft., fly 100 ft. (average)   +0           17 (+1 size, +6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 17    Alternate form, immunity to acid and cold, cloudwalking, vulnerability to fire   ---            ---
  Very young                                                                                           40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           19 (+9 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19                                                                                              ---            ---
  Young                                                                                                40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           22 (+12 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 22                                                                                             1st            ---
  Juvenile                                                                                             40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           24 (--1 size, +15 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 24   Feather fall                                                                     3rd            ---
  Young adult                                                                                          40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           27 (--1 size, +18 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 27   DR 5/magic                                                                       5th            20
  Adult                                                                                                40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           29 (--2 size, +21 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 29   Fog cloud                                                                        7th            22
  Mature adult                                                                                         40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           32 (--2 size, +24 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 32   DR 10/magic                                                                      9th            24
  Old                                                                                                  40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           35 (--2 size, +27 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 35   Control winds                                                                    11th           26
  Very old                                                                                             40 ft., fly 150 ft. (poor)      +0           38 (--2 size, +30 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 38   DR 15/magic                                                                      13th           27
  Ancient                                                                                              40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           39 (--4 size, +33 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 39   Control weather                                                                  15th           29
  Wyrm                                                                                                 40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           42 (--4 size, +36 natural), touch 6, flat-footed 42   DR 20/magic                                                                      17th           30
  Great wyrm                                                                                           40 ft., fly 200 ft. (clumsy)    +0           41 (--8 size, +39 natural), touch 2, flat-footed 41   Reverse gravity                                                                  19th           32
  \*Can also cast cleric spells and those from the Air, Good, Law, and Sun domains as arcane spells.                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- -----

A silver wyrmling's scales are blue-gray with silver highlights. As the
dragon approaches adulthood, its color gradually brightens until the
individual scales are scarcely visible.

#### Combat {#silver-dragon--combat}

Silver dragons are not violent and avoid combat except when faced with
highly evil or aggressive foes. If necessary, they use *fog cloud* or
*control weather* to blind or confuse opponents before attacking. When
angry, they use *reverse gravity* to fling enemies helplessly into the
air, where they can be snatched. Against flying opponents, a silver
dragon hides in clouds (creating some with *control weather* on clear
days), then jumps to the attack when it has the advantage.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** A silver dragon has two types of breath weapon,
a cone of cold and a cone of paralyzing gas. Creatures within a cone of
paralyzing gas must succeed on a Fortitude save or be paralyzed for 1d6
rounds plus 1 round per age category of the dragon.

**Alternate Form (Su):** A silver dragon can assume any animal or
humanoid form of Medium size or smaller as a standard action three times
per day. This ability functions as a *polymorph* spell cast on itself at
its caster level, except that the dragon does not regain hit points for
changing form and can only assume the form of an anirmal or humanoid.
The dragon can remain in its animal or humanoid form until it chooses to
assume a new one or return to its natural form.

**Cloudwalking (Su):** A silver dragon can tread on clouds or fog as
though on solid ground. The ability functions continuously but can be
negated or resumed at will.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 3/day---*fog cloud* (adult or older), *control
winds* (old or older); 2/day---*feather fall* (juvenile or older);
1/day--- *control weather* (ancient or older), *reverse gravity* (great
wyrm).

**Skills:** Bluff, Disguise, and Jump are considered class skills for
silver dragons.

## Dragon Turtle

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Dragon (Aquatic)
  Hit Dice:              12d12+60 (138 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), swim 30 ft.
  Armor Class:           25 (--2 size, +17 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 25
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+28
  Attack:                Bite +18 melee (4d6+8)
  Full Attack:           Bite +18 melee (4d6+8) and 2 claws +13 melee (2d8+4)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Breath weapon, snatch, capsize
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, *sleep,* and paralysis, low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +13, Ref +8, Will +9
  Abilities:             Str 27, Dex 10, Con 21, Int 12, Wis 13, Cha 12
  Skills:                Diplomacy +3, Hide +7\*, Intimidate +16, Listen +16, Search +16, Sense Motive +16, Spot +16, Survival +16 (+18 following tracks), Swim +21
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Cleave, Improved Bull Rush, Power Attack, Snatch
  Environment:           Temperate aquatic
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              Triple standard
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           13--24 HD (Huge); 25--36 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Its rough, deep green shell is much the same color as the deep water the
monster favors, and the silver highlights that line the shell resemble
light dancing on open water. The turtle's legs, tail, and head are a
lighter green, flecked with golden highlights. An adult dragon turtle
can measure from 20 to 30 feet from snout to tail, with a shell from 15
to 25 feet in diameter, and can weigh 8,000 to 32,000 pounds.

Dragon turtles speak Aquan, Draconic, and Common.

### Combat {#dragon-turtle--combat}

Dragon turtles are fierce fighters and generally attack any creature
that threatens their territory or looks like a potential meal.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** Cloud of superheated steam 20 feet high, 25 feet
wide, and 50 feet long, once every 1d4 rounds, damage 12d6 fire, Reflex
DC 21 half; effective both on the surface and underwater. The save DC is
Constitution-based.

**Capsize (Ex):** A submerged dragon turtle that surfaces under a boat
or ship less than 20 feet long capsizes the vessel 95% of the time. It
has a 50% chance to capsize a vessel from 20 to 60 feet long and a 20%
chance to capsize one over 60 feet long.

**Skills:** A dragon turtle has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to
perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to
take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered.

It can use the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a
straight line.

\*Dragon turtles have a +8 racial bonus on Hide checks when submerged.

## Dragonne

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Magical Beast
  Hit Dice:              9d10+27 (76 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), fly 30 ft. (poor)
  Armor Class:           18 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +9/+17
  Attack:                Bite +12 melee (2d6+4)
  Full Attack:           Bite +12 melee (2d6+4) and 2 claws +7 melee (2d4+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Pounce, roar
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +8, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 19, Dex 15, Con 17, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 12
  Skills:                Listen +11, Spot +11
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes, Improved Initiative, Track
  Environment:           Temperate deserts
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or pride (5--10)
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              Double standard
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           10--12 HD (Large); 13--27 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +4 (cohort)
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

A dragonne possesses huge claws and fangs, and large eyes, usually the
color of its scales. A dragonne is about 12 feet long and weighs about
700 pounds.

Dragonnes speak Draconic.

### Combat {#dragonne--combat}

A dragonne's wings are useful only for short flights, carrying the
creature for 10 to 30 minutes at a time. Nevertheless, it uses its wings
effectively in battle. If opponents attempt to charge or encircle it,
the dragonne simply takes to the air and finds a more defensible
position.

**Pounce (Ex):** If a dragonne charges, it can make a full attack in the
same round.

**Roar (Su):** A dragonne can loose a devastating roar every 1d4 rounds.
All creatures except dragonnes within 120 feet must succeed on a DC 15
Will save or become fatigued. Those within 30 feet who fail their saves
become exhausted. The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Skills:** Dragonnes have a +4 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

**Carrying Capacity:** A light load for a dragonne is up to 348 pounds;
a medium load, 349--699 pounds, and a heavy load, 700--1,050 pounds.

## Drider

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Aberration
  Hit Dice:              6d8+18 (45 hp)
  Initiative:            +2
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), climb 15 ft.
  Armor Class:           17 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +4/+10
  Attack:                Dagger +5 melee (1d6+2/19--20) or bite +6 melee (1d4+1 plus poison) or shortbow +5 ranged (1d8/x3)
  Full Attack:           2 daggers +3 melee (1d6+2/19--20, 1d6+1/19--20) and bite +1 melee (1d4+1 plus poison); or shortbow +5 ranged (1d8/x3)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spells, spell-like abilities, poison
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., spell resistance 17
  Saves:                 Fort +5, Ref +4, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 15, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 15, Wis 16, Cha 16
  Skills:                Climb +14, Concentration +9, Hide +10, Listen +9, Move Silently +12, Spot +9
  Feats:                 Combat Casting, Two-Weapon Fighting, Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           Underground
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or troupe (1--2 plus 7--12 Medium monstrous spiders)
  Challenge Rating:      7
  Treasure:              Double standard
  Alignment:             Always chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +4
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Driders speak Elven, Common, and Undercommon.

### Combat {#drider--combat}

Driders seldom pass up an opportunity to attack other creatures,
especially from ambush. They usually begin with a spell assault and
often levitate out of the enemy's reach.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 16, initial and secondary damage
1d6 Str. The save DC is Constitution based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** 1/day---*dancing lights* (DC 13),
*clairaudience/clairvoyance, darkness, detect good, detect law, detect
magic, dispel magic, faerie fire, levitate, suggestion* (DC 16). Caster
level 6th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Spells:** Driders cast spells as 6th-level clerics, wizards, or
sorcerers. Drider clerics can choose from the following domains: Chaos,
Destruction, Evil, and Trickery. The typical spells prepared shown here
are for a drider sorcerer.

*Typical Sorcerer Spells Known* (6/7/6/4, base save DC 13 + spell
level): 0---*daze, detect magic, ghost sound, mage hand, ray of frost,
read magic, resistance;* 1st---*mage armor, magic missile, ray of
enfeeblement, silent image;* 2nd--- *invisibility, web;*
3rd---*lightning bolt*.

**Skills:** A drider has a +4 racial bonus on Hide and Move Silently
checks. It has a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always choose
to take 10 on a Climb check, even if rushed or threatened.

## Dryad

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Fey
  Hit Dice:              4d6 (14 hp)
  Initiative:            +4
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (+4 Dex, +3 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/+2
  Attack:                Dagger +6 melee (1d4/19--20) or masterwork longbow +7 ranged (1d8/x3)
  Full Attack:           Dagger +6 melee (1d4/19--20) or masterwork longbow +7 ranged (1d8/x3)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/cold iron, tree dependent, wild empathy
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +8, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 19, Con 11, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 18
  Skills:                Escape Artist +11, Handle Animal +11, Hide +11, Knowledge (nature) +11, Listen +9, Move Silently +11, Ride +6, Spot +9, Survival +9, Use Rope +4 (+6 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Great Fortitude, Weapon Finesse
  Environment:           Temperate forests
  Organization:          Solitary or grove (4--7)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic good
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A dryad's delicate features are much like a female elf 's, though her
flesh is like bark or fine wood, and her hair is like a canopy of leaves
that changes color with the seasons.

Although they are generally solitary, up to seven dryads have been
encountered in one place on rare occasions.

Dryads speak Common, Elven, and Sylvan.

### Combat {#dryad--combat}

Shy, intelligent, and resolute, dryads are as elusive as they are
alluring---they avoid physical combat and are rarely seen unless they
wish to be. If threatened, or in need of an ally, a dryad uses *charm
person* or *suggestion,* attempting to gain control of the attacker(s)
who could help the most against the rest. Any attack on her tree,
however, provokes the dryad into a frenzied defense.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*entangle* (DC 13), *speak with
plants, tree shape;* 3/day--- *charm person* (DC 13), *deep slumber* (DC
15), *tree stride;* 1/day---*suggestion* (DC 15). Caster level 6th. The
save DCs are Wisdom-based.

**Tree Dependent (Su):** Each dryad is mystically bound to a single,
enormous oak tree and must never stray more than 300 yards from it. Any
who do become ill and die within 4d6 hours. A dryad's oak does not
radiate magic.

**Wild Empathy (Ex):** This power works like the druid's wild empathy
class feature, except that the dryad has a +6 racial bonus on the check.

## Dwarf

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Dwarf, 1st-Level      | Duergar, 1st-Level    |
|                       | Warrior               | Warrior               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Medium Humanoid       | Medium Humanoid       |
|                       | (Dwarf)               | (Dwarf)               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Hit Dice:             | 1d8+2 (6 hp)          | 1d8+5 (9 hp)          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Initiative:           | +0                    | +0                    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Speed:                | 20 ft. in scale mail  | 20 ft. in chainmail   |
|                       | (4 squares); base     | (4 squares); base     |
|                       | speed 20 ft.          | speed 20 ft.          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Armor Class:          | 16 (+4 scale mail, +2 | 17 (+5 chainmail, +2  |
|                       | heavy shield), touch  | heavy shield), touch  |
|                       | 10, flat-footed 16    | 10, flat-footed 17    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Base Attack/Grapple:  | +1/+2                 | +1/+2                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Attack:               | Dwarven waraxe +3     | Warhammer +2 melee    |
|                       | melee (1d10+1/x3) or  | (1d8+1/x3) or light   |
|                       | shortbow +1 ranged    | crossbow +1 ranged    |
|                       | (1d6/x3)              | (1d8/19--20)          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Full Attack:          | Dwarven waraxe +3     | Warhammer +2 melee    |
|                       | melee (1d10+1/x3) or  | (1d8+1/x3) or light   |
|                       | shortbow +1 ranged    | crossbow +1 ranged    |
|                       | (1d6/x3)              | (1d8/19--20)          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Space/Reach:          | 5 ft./5 ft.           | 5 ft./5 ft.           |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Special Attacks:      | Dwarf traits          | Duergar traits,       |
|                       |                       | spell-like abilities  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Special Qualities:    | Darkvision 60 ft.,    | Darkvision 60 ft.,    |
|                       | dwarf traits          | duergar traits        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Saves:                | Fort +4\*, Ref +0\*,  | Fort +4\*, Ref +0\*,  |
|                       | Will --1\*            | Will --1\*            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Abilities:            | Str 13, Dex 11, Con   | Str 13, Dex 11, Con   |
|                       | 14, Int 10, Wis 9,    | 14, Int 10, Wis 9,    |
|                       | Cha 6                 | Cha 4                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Skills:               | Appraise +2, Craft    | Appraise +2, Craft    |
|                       | (blacksmithing) +2,   | (blacksmithing) +2,   |
|                       | Craft (stonemasonry)  | Craft (stonemasonry)  |
|                       | +2, Listen +2, Spot   | +2, Listen +3, Move   |
|                       | +2                    | Silently --4, Spot +2 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Feats:                | Weapon Focus (dwarven | Toughness             |
|                       | waraxe)               |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Environment:          | <div>                 | Underground           |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Temperate mountains   |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Deep: Underground)   |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Organization:         | Team (2--4), squad    | Team (2--4), squad    |
|                       | (11--20 plus 2        | (9--16 plus 3         |
|                       | 3rd-level sergeants   | 3rd-level sergeants   |
|                       | and 1 leader of       | and 1 leader of       |
|                       | 3rd--6th level), or   | 3rd--8th level) or    |
|                       | clan (30--100 plus    | clan (20--80 plus 25% |
|                       | 30% noncombatants     | noncombatants plus 1  |
|                       | plus 1 3rd-level      | 3rd-level sergeant    |
|                       | sergeant per 10       | per 5 adults, 3--6    |
|                       | adults, 5 5th-level   | 6th-level             |
|                       | lieutenants, and 3    | lieutenants, and 1--4 |
|                       | 7th-level captains)   | 9th-level captains)   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Challenge Rating:     | ½                     | 1                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Treasure:             | Standard coins;       | Standard coins,       |
|                       | double goods;         | double goods,         |
|                       | standard items        | standard items        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Alignment:            | <div>                 | Often lawful evil     |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Often lawful good     |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Deep: Usually lawful |                       |
|                       | neutral or neutral)   |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Advancement:          | By character class    | By character class    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Level Adjustment:     | +0                    | +1                    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Dwarves favor earth tones in their clothing and prefer simple and
functional garb. The skin can be very dark, but it is always some shade
of tan or brown. Hair color can be black, gray, or brown. Dwarves
average 4 feet tall and weigh as much as adult humans.

Dwarves speak Dwarven. Most who travel outside dwarven lands (as
traders, mercenaries, or adventurers) know the Common tongue, while
warriors in the dwarven cities usually learn Goblin to better
interrogate and spy on those evil denizens of the deep caves.

Most dwarves encountered outside their home are warriors.

### Combat {#dwarf--combat}

Dwarves are experts in combat, effectively using their environment and
executing well-planned group attacks. They rarely use magic in fights,
since they have few wizards or sorcerers (but dwarven clerics throw
themselves into battle as heartily as their fellow warriors). If they
have time to prepare, they may build deadfalls or other traps involving
stone. In addition to the dwarven waraxe and thrown hammer, dwarves also
use warhammers, picks, shortbows, heavy crossbows, and maces.

**Dwarf Traits (Ex):** Dwarves possess the following racial traits.

--- +2 Constitution, --2 Charisma.

---Medium size.

---A dwarf 's base land speed is 20 feet. However, dwarves can move at
this speed even when wearing medium or heavy armor or when carrying a
medium or heavy load.

---Darkvision out to to 60 feet.

---Stonecunning: This ability grants a dwarf a +2 racial bonus on Search
checks to notice unusual stonework, such as sliding walls, stonework
traps, new construction (even when built to match the old), unsafe stone
surfaces, shaky stone ceilings, and the like. Something that isn't stone
but that is disguised as stone also counts as unusual stonework. A dwarf
who merely comes within 10 feet of unusual stonework can make a Search
check as if he were actively searching, and a dwarf can use the Search
skill to find stonework traps as a rogue can. A dwarf can also intuit
depth, sensing his approximate depth underground as naturally as a human
can sense which way is up. Dwarves have a sixth sense about stonework,
an innate ability that they get plenty of opportunity to practice and
hone in their underground homes.

---Weapon Familiarity: Dwarves treat dwarven waraxes and dwarven
urgroshes as martial weapons, rather than exotic weapons.

---Stability: Dwarves are exceptionally stable on their feet. A dwarf
has a +4 bonus on ability checks made to resist being bull rushed or
tripped when standing on the ground (but not when climbing, flying,
riding, or otherwise not standing firmly on the ground).

--- +2 racial bonus on saving throws against poison. \*Not reflected in
the saving throw numbers given here.

--- +2 racial bonus on saving throws against spells and spell-like
effects. \*Not reflected in the saving throw numbers given here.

--- +1 racial bonus on attack rolls against orcs (including halforcs)
and goblinoids (including goblins, hobgoblins, and bugbears).

--- +4 dodge bonus to Armor Class against creatures of the giant type
(such as ogres, trolls, and hill giants).

--- +2 racial bonus on Appraise checks that are related to stone or
metal items.

--- +2 racial bonus on Craft checks that are related to stone or metal.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Dwarven. Bonus Languages: Giant, Gnome,
Goblin, Orc, Terran, Undercommon.

---Favored Class: Fighter.

The dwarf warrior presented here had the following ability scores before
racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8.

### Subraces

The information above is for hill dwarves, the most common variety.

There are three other major dwarven subraces, which differ from hill
dwarves as follows.

#### Deep Dwarf

These dwarves live far underground and tend to be more standoffish with
non-dwarves.

Deep dwarves are the same height as other dwarves, but leaner. Their
skin sometimes has a reddish tinge, and their large eyes lack the
brightness of those of their kindred, being a washed-out blue. Their
hair color ranges from bright red to straw blond. They have little
contact with surface dwellers, relying on hill dwarves or mountain
dwarves to trade goods for them.

Deep dwarves speak Dwarven and Goblin, and occasionally Draconic or
Undercommon.

**Deep Dwarf Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the hill
dwarf traits, except where noted.

---Racial bonus on saves against spells and spell-like abilities
increases to +3.

---Racial bonus on Fortitude saves against poisons increases to +3.

---Darkvision out to 90 feet.

---Light Sensitivity: Deep dwarves are dazzled in bright sunlight or
within the radius of a *daylight* spell.

#### Duergar

Sometimes called gray dwarves, these evil beings dwell in the
underground.

Most duergar are bald (even the females), and they dress in drab
clothing that is designed to blend into stone. In their lairs they may
wear jewelry, but it is always kept dull. They war with other dwarves,
even allying with other underground creatures from time to time.

Duergar speak Dwarven and Undercommon.

**Duergar Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the hill dwarf
traits, except where noted.

--- --4 Charisma instead of --2.

---Darkvision out to 120 feet.

---Immunity to paralysis, phantasms, and poison. This trait replaces the
hill dwarf 's +2 racial bonus on saving throws against poison.

--- +2 racial bonus on saves against spells and spell-like abilities.

---Spell-Like Abilities: 1/day---*enlarge person* and *invisibility* as
a wizard of twice the duergar's class level (minimum caster level 3rd);
these abilities affect only the duergar and whatever it carries.

---Light Sensitivity: Duergar are dazzled in bright sunlight or within
the radius of a *daylight* spell.

--- +4 racial bonus on Move Silently checks.

--- +1 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Dwarven, Undercommon.

Bonus Languages: Draconic, Giant, Goblin, Orc, Terran. This trait
replaces the hill dwarf 's automatic and bonus languages.

---Favored Class: Fighter.

---Level adjustment +1

---Unlike other dwarves, duergar do not have weapon familiarity with the
dwarven waraxe and dwarven urgrosh.

The duergar warrior presented here had the following ability scores
before racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8.

**Challenge Rating:** Duergar with levels in NPC classes have a CR equal
to their character level. Duergar with levels in PC classes have a CR
equal to their character level +1.

#### Mountain Dwarf

Mountain dwarves live deeper under the mountains than hill dwarves but
generally not as far underground as deep dwarves. They average about
4-1/2 feet tall and have lighter skin and hair than hill dwarves, but
the same general appearance.
