---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Monsters / Monsters (Intro-A)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MONSTERS (INTRO-A)

## Table of Contents

-   [Reading the Entries](#reading-the-entries)
    -   [Statistics Block](#statistics-block)
        -   [Name](#name)
        -   [Size and Type](#size-and-type)
        -   [Hit Dice](#hit-dice)
        -   [Initiative](#initiative)
        -   [Speed](#speed)
        -   [Armor Class](#armor-class)
        -   [Base Attack/Grapple](#base-attack-grapple)
        -   [Attack](#attack)
        -   [Full Attack](#full-attack)
        -   [Space/Reach](#space-reach)
        -   [Special Attacks and Special
            Qualities](#special-attacks-and-special-qualities)
        -   [Saves](#saves)
        -   [Abilities](#abilities)
        -   [Skills](#skills)
        -   [Feats](#feats)
        -   [Environment](#environment)
        -   [Organization](#organization)
        -   [Challenge Rating](#challenge-rating)
        -   [Treasure](#treasure)
        -   [Alignment](#alignment)
        -   [Advancement](#advancement)
        -   [Level Adjustment](#level-adjustment)
-   [Aboleth](#aboleth)
    -   [Combat](#aboleth--combat)
    -   [Aboleth Mage](#aboleth-mage)
        -   [Combat](#aboleth-mage--combat)
-   [Achaierai](#achaierai)
    -   [Combat](#achaierai--combat)
-   [Allip](#allip)
    -   [Combat](#allip--combat)
-   [Angel](#angel)
    -   [Combat](#angel--combat)
    -   [Angel, Astral Deva](#angel-astral-deva)
        -   [Combat](#angel-astral-deva--combat)
    -   [Angel, Planetar](#angel-planetar)
        -   [Combat](#angel-planetar--combat)
    -   [Angel, Solar](#angel-solar)
        -   [Combat](#angel-solar--combat)
-   [Animated Object](#animated-object)
    -   [Combat](#animated-object--combat)
-   [Ankheg](#ankheg)
    -   [Combat](#ankheg--combat)
-   [Aranea](#aranea)
    -   [Combat](#aranea--combat)
-   [Archon](#archon)
    -   [Combat](#archon--combat)
    -   [Lantern Archon](#lantern-archon)
        -   [Combat](#lantern-archon--combat)
    -   [Hound Archon](#hound-archon)
        -   [Combat](#hound-archon--combat)
    -   [Hound Archon Hero](#hound-archon-hero)
        -   [Combat](#hound-archon-hero--combat)
    -   [Hound Archon Hero Mounts](#hound-archon-hero-mounts)
    -   [Hound Archons as Characters](#hound-archons-as-characters)
    -   [Trumpet Archon](#trumpet-archon)
        -   [Combat](#trumpet-archon--combat)
-   [Arrowhawk](#arrowhawk)
    -   [Combat](#arrowhawk--combat)
-   [Assassin Vine](#assassin-vine)
    -   [Combat](#assassin-vine--combat)
-   [Athach](#athach)
    -   [Combat](#athach--combat)
-   [Avoral](#avoral)
    -   [Combat](#avoral--combat)
-   [Azer](#azer)
    -   [Combat](#azer--combat)
    -   [Azers as Characters](#azers-as-characters)

## Reading the Entries

Each monster description is organized in the same general format, as
outlined below.

### Statistics Block

This portion of a monster description contains basic game information on
the creature.

#### Name

This is the name by which the creature is generally known. The
descriptive text may provide other names.

#### Size and Type

This line describes the creature's size. A size modifier applies to the
creature's Armor Class (AC) and attack bonus, as well as to certain
skills. A creature's size also determines how far it can reach to make a
melee attack and how much space it occupies in a fight (see Space/Reach,
below).

The size and type line continues with the creature's type. Type
determines how magic affects a creature. Type determines certain
features, such as Hit Dice size, base attack bonus, base saving throw
bonuses, and skill points.

#### Hit Dice

This line gives the creature's number and type of Hit Dice, and lists
any bonus hit points. A parenthetical note gives the average hit points
for a creature of the indicated number of Hit Dice. A creature's Hit
Dice total is also treated as its level for determining how spells
affect the creature, its rate of natural healing, and its maximum ranks
in a skill.

#### Initiative

This line gives the creature's modifier on initiative checks.

#### Speed

This line gives the creature's tactical speed on land (the amount of
distance it can cover in one move action). If the creature wears armor
that reduces its speed, the creature's base land speed follows.

If the creature has other modes of movement, these are given after (or
in place of) the land speed. Unless noted otherwise, modes of movement
are natural (not magical).

#### Armor Class

The Armor Class line gives the creature's AC for normal combat and
includes a parenthetical mention of the modifiers contributing to it
(usually size, Dexterity, and natural armor). The creature's touch and
flat-footed ACs follow the combat-ready AC.

A creature's armor proficiencies (if it has any) depend on its type, but
in general a creature is automatically proficient with any kind of armor
it is described as wearing (light, medium, or heavy), and with all
lighter kinds of armor.

#### Base Attack/Grapple {#base-attack-grapple}

The number before the slash on this line is the creature's base attack
bonus (before any modifiers are applied). This number won't often be
used, but it can be handy sometimes, especially if the creature has the
Power Attack or Combat Expertise feats.

The number after the slash is the creature's grapple bonus, which is
used when the creature makes a grapple attack or when someone tries to
grapple the creature. The grapple bonus includes all modifiers that
apply to the creature's grapple checks (base attack bonus, Strength
modifier, special size modifier, and any other applicable modifier, such
as a racial bonus on grapple checks).

#### Attack

This line shows the single attack the creature makes with an attack
action. In most cases, this is also the attack the creature uses when
making an attack of opportunity as well. The attack line provides the
weapon used (natural or manufactured), attack bonus, and form of attack
(melee or ranged). The attack bonus given includes modifications for
size and Strength (for melee attacks) or Dexterity (for ranged attacks).
A creature with the Weapon Finesse feat can use its Dexterity modifier
on melee attacks. If the creature uses natural attacks, the natural
weapon given here is the creature's primary natural weapon. If the
creature has several different weapons at its disposal, the alternatives
are shown, with each different attack separated by the word "or." A
creature can use one of its secondary natural weapons when making an
attack action, but if it does it takes an attack penalty, as noted in
the Full Attack section below. The damage that each attack deals is
noted parenthetically. Damage from an attack is always at least 1 point,
even if a subtraction from a die roll reduces the result to 0 or lower.

#### Full Attack

This line shows all the physical attacks the creature makes when it uses
a full-round action to make a full attack. It gives the number of
attacks along with the weapon, attack bonus, and form of attack (melee
or ranged). The first entry is for the creature's primary weapon, with
an attack bonus including modifications for size and Strength (for melee
attacks) or Dexterity (for ranged attacks). A creature with the Weapon
Finesse feat can use its Dexterity modifier on melee attacks. The
remaining weapons are secondary, and attacks with them are made with a
--5 penalty to the attack roll, no matter how many there are. Creatures
with the Multiattack feat take only a --2 penalty on secondary attacks.
The damage that each attack deals is noted parenthetically. Damage from
an attack is always at least 1 point, even if a subtraction from a die
roll reduces the result to 0 or lower.

A creature's primary attack damage includes its full Strength modifier
(1-1/2 times its Strength bonus if the attack is with the creature's
sole natural weapon) and is given first. Secondary attacks add only 1/2
the creature's Strength bonus and are given second in the parentheses.

If any attacks also have some special effect other than damage, that
information is given here.

Unless noted otherwise, creatures using natural weapons deal double
damage on critical hits.

**Manufactured Weapons:** Creatures that use swords, bows, spears, and
the like follow the same rules as characters do. The bonus for attacks
with two-handed weapons is 1-1/2 times the creature's Strength modifier
(if it is a bonus), and is given first. Offhand weapons add only 1/2 the
Strength bonus and are given second in the parentheses.

#### Space/Reach {#space-reach}

This line describes how much space the creature takes up on the battle
grid and thereby needs to fight effectively, as well as how close it has
to be to threaten an opponent. The number before the slash is the
creature's space, or how many feet one side of the creature occupies.
The number after the slash is the creature's natural reach. If the
creature has exceptional reach due to a weapon, tentacle, or the like,
the extended reach and its source are noted in parentheses at the end of
the line.

#### Special Attacks and Special Qualities

Many creatures have unusual abilities. A monster entry breaks these
abilities into special attacks and special qualities. The latter
category includes defenses, vulnerabilities, and other special abilities
that are not modes of attack. A special ability is either extraordinary
(Ex), spell-like (Sp), or supernatural (Su). Additional information
(when needed) is provided in the creature's descriptive text.

When a special ability allows a saving throw, the kind of save and the
save DC is noted in the descriptive text. Most saving throws against
special abilities have DCs calculated as follows: 10 + 1/2 the
attacker's racial Hit Dice + the relevant ability modifier.

The save DC is given in the creature's description along with the
ability on which the DC is based.

#### Saves

This line gives the creature's Fortitude, Reflex, and Will save
modifiers.

#### Abilities

This line lists the creature's ability scores, in the customary order:
Str, Dex, Con, Int, Wis, Cha. Except where noted otherwise, each
creature is assumed to have the standard array of ability scores before
racial adjustments (all 11s and 10s). To determine any creature's racial
ability adjustments, subtract 10 from any even-numbered ability score
and subtract 11 from any odd-numbered score. (Exceptions are noted in
the Combat section of a creature's descriptive text.)

**Strength:** Quadrupeds can carry heavier loads than bipeds can. Any
creature with four or more motive limbs can carry a load as a quadruped,
even if it does not necessarily use all the limbs at once.

**Intelligence:** A creature can speak all the languages mentioned in
its description, plus one additional language per point of Intelligence
bonus. Any creature with an Intelligence score of 3 or higher
understands at least one language (Common, unless noted otherwise).

**Nonabilities:** Some creatures lack certain ability scores. These
creatures do not have an ability score of 0---they lack the ability
altogether. The modifier for a nonability is +0.

#### Skills

This line gives the creature's skills, along with each skill's modifier
(including adjustments for ability scores, armor check penalties, and
any bonuses from feats or racial traits). All listed skills are class
skills, unless the creature has a character class (noted in the entry).
A creature's type and Intelligence score determine the number of skill
points it has.

The Skills section of the creature's description recaps racial bonuses
and other adjustments to skill modifiers for the sake of clarity; these
bonuses should not be added to the listed skill modifiers.

An asterisk (\*) beside the relevant score and in the Skills section of
the descriptive text indicates a conditional adjustment, one that
applies only in certain situations.

**Natural Tendencies:** Some creatures simply aren't made for certain
types of physical activity. If it seems clear that a particular creature
simply is not made for a particular physical activity, that creature
takes a --8 penalty on skill checks that defy its natural tendencies.

In extreme circumstances the creature fails the check automatically.

#### Feats

The line gives the creature's feats. A monster gains feats just as a
character does. Sometimes a creature has one or more bonus feats, marked
with a superscript B (^B^). Creatures often do not have the
prerequisites for a bonus feat. If this is so, the creature can still
use the feat. If you wish to customize the creature with new feats, you
can reassign its other feats, but not its bonus feats. A creature cannot
have a feat that is not a bonus feat unless it has the feat's
prerequisites.

#### Environment

This line gives a type of climate and terrain where the creature is
typically found. This describes a tendency, but is not exclusionary.

#### Organization

This line describes the kinds of groups the creature might form. A range
of numbers in parentheses indicates how many combat-ready adults are in
each type of group. Many groups also have a number of noncombatants,
expressed as a percentage of the fighting population. Noncombatants can
include young, the infirm, slaves, or other individuals who are not
inclined to fight. If the organization line contains the term
"domesticated," the creature is generally found only in the company of
other creatures, whom it serves in some capacity.

#### Challenge Rating

This shows the average level of a party of adventurers for which one
creature would make an encounter of moderate difficulty.

#### Treasure

This line reflects how much wealth the creature owns. In most cases, a
creature keeps valuables in its home or lair and has no treasure with it
when it travels. Intelligent creatures that own useful, portable
treasure (such as magic items) tend to carry and use these, leaving
bulky items at home.

#### Alignment

This line gives the alignment that the creature is most likely to have.
Every entry includes a qualifier that indicates how broadly that
alignment applies to the species as a whole.

#### Advancement

The monster entry usually describes only the most commonly encountered
version of a creature. The advancement line shows how tough a creature
can get, in terms of extra Hit Dice. (This is not an absolute limit, but
exceptions are extremely rare.) Often, intelligent creatures advance by
gaining a level in a character class instead of just gaining a new Hit
Die.

#### Level Adjustment

This line is included in the entries of creatures suitable for use as
player characters or as cohorts (usually creatures with Intelligence
scores of at least 3 and possessing opposable thumbs). Add this number
to the creature's total Hit Dice, including class levels, to get the
creature's effective character level (ECL). A character's ECL affects
the experience the character earns, the amount of experience the
character must have before gaining a new level, and the character's
starting equipment.

## Aboleth

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Aboleth                                                                     Aboleth Mage, 10th-Level Wizard
                         Huge Aberration (Aquatic)                                                   Huge Aberration (Aquatic)
  Hit Dice:              8d8+40 (76 hp)                                                              8d8+56 plus 10d4+70 (177 hp)
  Initiative:            +1                                                                          +7
  Speed:                 10 ft. (2 squares), swim 60 ft.                                             10 ft. (2 squares), swim 60 ft.
  Armor Class:           16 (--2 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 15                  18 (--2 size, +3 Dex, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+22                                                                      +11/+28
  Attack:                Tentacle +12 melee (1d6+8 plus slime)                                       Tentacle +18 melee (1d6+9 plus slime)
  Full Attack:           4 tentacles +12 melee (1d6+8 plus slime)                                    4 tentacles +18 melee (1d6+9 plus slime)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.                                                               15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Enslave, psionics, slime                                                    Enslave, psionics, slime, spells
  Special Qualities:     Aquatic subtype, darkvision 60 ft., mucus cloud                             Aquatic subtype, darkvision 60 ft., mucus cloud, summon familiar
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +3, Will +11                                                   Fort +15, Ref +10, Will +15
  Abilities:             Str 26, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 15, Wis 17, Cha 17                              Str 28, Dex 16, Con 24, Int 20, Wis 16, Cha 14
  Skills:                Concentration +16, Knowledge (any one) +13, Listen +16, Spot +16, Swim +8   Bluff +13, Concentration +25, Decipher Script +15, Diplomacy +6, Disguise +2 (+4 acting), Intimidate +4, Knowledge (arcana) +15, Knowledge (dungeoneering) +25, Knowledge (history) +15, Knowledge (the planes) +15, Listen +15, Search +10, Sense Motive +15, Spellcraft +20, Spot +17, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks, on other planes, and underground), Swim +8
  Feats:                 Alertness, Combat Casting, Iron Will                                        Combat Casting, Empower Spell, Eschew Materials, Great Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes, Scribe Scroll, Spell Focus (illusion), Spell Focus (enchantment), Spell Penetration
  Environment            Underground                                                                 Underground
  Organization:          Solitary, brood (2--4),or slaver brood (1d3+1 plus 7--12 skum)              Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7                                                                           17
  Treasure:              Double standard                                                             Double standard
  Alignment:             Usually lawful evil                                                         Usually lawful evil
  Advancement:           9--16 HD (Huge); 17--24 HD (Gargantuan)                                     By character class
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                         ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The aboleth is a revolting fishlike amphibian found primarily in
subterranean lakes and rivers. An aboleth has a pink belly. Four
pulsating blueblack orifices line the bottom of its body and secrete
gray slime that smells like rancid grease. It uses its tail for
propulsion in the water and drags itself along with its tentacles on
land. An aboleth weighs about 6,500 pounds.

Aboleths speak their own language, as well as Undercommon and Aquan.

### Combat {#aboleth--combat}

An aboleth attacks by flailing with its long, slimy tentacles, though it
prefers to fight from a distance using its illusion powers.

**Enslave (Su):** Three times per day, an aboleth can attempt to enslave
any one living creature within 30 feet. The target must succeed on a DC
17 Will save or be affected as though by a *dominate person* spell
(caster level 16th). An enslaved creature obeys the aboleth's telepathic
commands until freed by *remove curse,* and can attempt a new Will save
every 24 hours to break free. The control is also broken if the aboleth
dies or travels more than 1 mile from its slave. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Psionics (Sp):** At will---*hypnotic pattern* (DC 15), *illusory wall*
(DC 17), *mirage arcana* (DC 18), *persistent image* (DC 18),
*programmed image* (DC 19), *project image* (DC 20), *veil* (DC 19).
Effective caster level 16th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Slime (Ex):** A blow from an aboleth's tentacle can cause a terrible
affliction. A creature hit by a tentacle must succeed on a DC 19
Fortitude save or begin to transform over the next 1d4+1 minutes, the
skin gradually becoming a clear, slimy membrane. An afflicted creature
must remain moistened with cool, fresh water or take 1d12 points of
damage every 10 minutes. The slime reduces the creature's natural armor
bonus by 1 (but never to less than 0). The save DC is
Constitution-based.

A *remove disease* spell cast before the transformation is complete will
restore an afflicted creature to normal. Afterward, however, only a
*heal* or *mass heal* spell can reverse the affliction.

**Mucus Cloud (Ex):** An aboleth underwater surrounds itself with a
viscous cloud of mucus roughly 1 foot thick. Any creature coming into
contact with and inhaling this substance must succeed on a DC 19
Fortitude save or lose the ability to breathe air for the next 3 hours.
An affected creature suffocates in 2d6 minutes if removed from the
water. Renewed contact with the mucus cloud and failing another
Fortitude save continues the effect for another 3 hours. The save DC is
Constitution-based.

**Skills:** An aboleth has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to
perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to
take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use
the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line.

### Aboleth Mage

#### Combat {#aboleth-mage--combat}

The save DC for the aboleth mage's transformation tentacle attack (DC
21) and its mucus cloud (DC 21) are adjusted for its higher Constitution
score. The save DC for its enslave ability (DC 16) is adjusted for its
lower Charisma score, as are the save DCs for its psionic abilities:
*Hypnotic pattern* (DC 14), *illusory wall* (DC 16), *mirage arcana* (DC
17), *persistent image* (DC 17), *programmed image* (DC 18), *project
image* (DC 19), *veil* (DC 18). Effective caster level 16th.

The aboleth mage uses a number of spells, such as *displacement*,
*greater invisibility*, and *wall of force,* to protect itself while
seizing control of its foes with spells and innate abilities.

*Typical Wizard Spells Prepared* (4/6/5/4/4/3; save DC 15 + spell
level): 0---*daze, detect magic* (2), *resistance*; 1st---*alarm, charm
person, color spray, mage armor, magic missile* (2); 2nd---*blur, bull's
strength, darkness, fox's cunning, see invisibilty;* 3rd---*dispel
magic, displacement,fly, lightning bolt;* 4th---*greater invisibility*,
*phantasmal killer, scrying, stoneskin;* 5th---*hold monster,* empowered
*lightning bolt, wall of force.*

## Achaierai

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              6d8+12 (39 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares)
  Armor Class:           20 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+14
  Attack:                Claw +9 melee (2d6+4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +9 melee (2d6+4) and bite +4 melee (4d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Black cloud
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., spell resistance 19
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +7
  Abilities:             Str 19, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 11, Wis 14, Cha 16
  Skills:                Balance +10, Climb +13, Diplomacy +5, Hide +6, Jump +21, Listen +11, Move Silently +10, Sense Motive +11, Spot +11
  Feats:                 Dodge, Mobility, Spring Attack
  Environment:           A lawful-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or flock (5--8)
  Challenge Rating:      5
  Treasure:              Double standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful evil
  Advancement:           7--12 HD (Large); 13--18 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Achaierais are massive, 15-foot-tall flightless birds that inhabit
lawful planes of battle and are only occasionally encountered elsewhere.

Achaierais speak Infernal. They weigh about 750 pounds.

### Combat {#achaierai--combat}

In close combat, an achaierai lashes out with two of its four legs and
snaps with its powerful beak. It makes frequent use of its Spring Attack
feat to strike quickly and then retreat out of range before an enemy can
counterattack.

An achaierai's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as evil-aligned and lawfulaligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Black Cloud (Ex):** Up to three times per day an achaierai can release
a choking, toxic black cloud.

Those other than achaierai within 10 feet instantly take 2d6 points of
damage. They must also succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or be affected
for 3 hours as though by an *insanity* spell (caster level 16th). The
save DC is Constitution-based.

## Allip

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Undead (Incorporeal)
  Hit Dice:              4d12 (26 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 Fly 30 ft. (perfect) (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           15 (+1 Dex, +4 deflection), touch 15, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/---
  Attack:                Incorporeal touch +3 melee (1d4 Wisdom drain)
  Full Attack:           Incorporeal touch +3 melee (1d4 Wisdom drain)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Babble, madness, Wisdom drain
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., incorporeal traits, +2 turn resistance, undead traits
  Saves:                 Fort +1, Ref +4, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str ---, Dex 12, Con ---, Int 11, Wis 11, Cha 18
  Skills:                Hide +8, Intimidate +7, Listen +7, Search +4, Spot +7, Survival +0 (+2 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative, Lightning Reflexes
  Environment:           Any
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral evil
  Advancement:           5--12 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An allip is the spectral remains of someone driven to suicide by a
madness that afflicted it in life. It craves only revenge and
unrelentingly pursues those who tormented it in life and pushed it over
the brink.

An allip cannot speak intelligibly.

### Combat {#allip--combat}

An allip is unable to cause physical harm, although it doesn't appear to
know that. It keeps flailing away at enemies, yet it inflicts no wounds.

**Babble (Su):** An allip constantly mutters and whines to itself,
creating a hypnotic effect. All sane creatures within 60 feet of the
allip must succeed on a DC 16 Will save or be affected as though by a
*hypnotism* spell for 2d4 rounds. This is a sonic mind-affecting
compulsion effect.

Creatures that successfully save cannot be affected by the same allip's
babble for 24 hours. The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Madness (Su):** Anyone targeting an allip with a thought detection,
mind control, or telepathic ability makes direct contact with its
tortured mind and takes 1d4 points of Wisdom damage.

**Wisdom Drain (Su):** An allip causes 1d4 points of Wisdom drain each
time it hits with its incorporeal touch attack. On each such successful
attack, it gains 5 temporary hit points.

## Angel

Angels are a race of celestials, beings who live on the good-aligned
Outer Planes.

Angels can be of any good alignment. Regardless of their alignment,
angels never lie, cheat, or steal. They are impeccably honorable in all
their dealings and often prove the most trustworthy and diplomatic of
all the celestials.

All angels are blessed with comely looks, though their actual
appearances vary widely.

Angels speak Celestial, Infernal, and Draconic, though they can speak
with almost any creature because of their tongues ability.

### Combat {#angel--combat}

In combat, most angels make full use of their mobility and their ability
to attack at a distance.

**Angel Traits:** An angel possesses the following traits (unless
otherwise noted in a creature's entry).

---Darkvision out to 60 feet and low-light vision.

---Immunity to acid, cold, and petrification.

---Resistance to electricity 10 and fire 10.

--- +4 racial bonus on saves against poison.

---*Protective Aura (Su):* Against attacks made or effects created by
evil creatures, this ability provides a +4 deflection bonus to AC and a
+4 resistance bonus on saving throws to anyone within 20 feet of the
angel. Otherwise, it functions as a *magic circle against evil* effect
and a *lesser globe of invulnerability,* both with a radius of 20 feet
(caster level equals angel's HD). This aura can be dispelled, but the
angel can create it again as a free action on its next turn. (The
defensive benefits from the circle are not included in an angel's
statistics block.)

---*Tongues (Su):* All angels can speak with any creature that has a
language, as though using a *tongues* spell (caster level equal to
angel's Hit Dice). This ability is always active.

### Angel, Astral Deva

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Angel, Extraplanar, Good)
  Hit Dice:              12d8+48 (102 hp)
  Initiative:            +8
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares), fly 100 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           29 (+4 Dex, +15 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 25
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+18
  Attack:                *+3 heavy mace of disruption* +21 melee (1d8+12 plus stun) or slam +18 melee (1d8+9)
  Full Attack:           *+3 heavy mace of disruption* +21/+16/+11 melee (1d8+12 plus stun) or slam +18 melee (1d8+9)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, stun
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/evil, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, immunity to acid, cold, and petrification, protective aura, resistance to electricity 10 and fire 10, spell resistance 30, tongues, uncanny dodge
  Saves:                 Fort +14 (+18 against poison), Ref +12, Will +12
  Abilities:             Str 22, Dex 18, Con 18, Int 18, Wis 18, Cha 20
  Skills:                Concentration +19, Craft or Knowledge (any three) +19, Diplomacy +22, Escape Artist +19, Hide +19, Intimidate +20, Listen +23, Move Silently +19, Sense Motive +19, Spot +23, Use Rope +4 (+6 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Alertness, Cleave, Great Fortitude, Improved Initiative, Power Attack
  Environment:           Any good-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or squad (3--5)
  Challenge Rating:      14
  Treasure:              No coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always good (any)
  Advancement:           13--18 HD (Medium); 19--36 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      +8
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An astral deva is about 7-1/2 feet tall and weighs about 250 pounds.

#### Combat {#angel-astral-deva--combat}

An astral deva is not afraid to enter melee combat. It takes a fierce
joy in bashing evil foes with its powerful *+3 heavy mace of
disruption.*

An astral deva's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*aid, continual flame, detect evil,
discern lies* (DC 19), *dispel evil* (DC 20), *dispel magic, holy aura*
(DC 23), *holy smite* (DC 19), *holy word* (DC 22), *invisibility* (self
only), *plane shift* (DC 22), *polymorph* (self only), *remove curse*
(DC 18), *remove disease* (DC 18), *remove fear* (DC 16); 7/day---*cure
light wounds* (DC 16), *see invisibility;* 1/day---*blade barrier* (DC
21), *heal* (DC 21). Caster level 12th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Stun (Su):** If an astral deva strikes an opponent twice in one round
with its mace, that creature must succeed on a DC 22 Fortitude save or
be stunned for 1d6 rounds. The save DC is Strength-based.

**Uncanny Dodge (Ex):** An astral deva retains its Dexterity bonus to AC
when flat-footed, and it cannot be flanked except by a rogue of at least
16th level. It can flank characters with the uncanny dodge ability as if
it were a 12th-level rogue.

### Angel, Planetar

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Angel, Extraplanar, Good)
  Hit Dice:              14d8+70 (133 hp)
  Initiative:            +8
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 90 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           32 (--1 size, +4 Dex, +19 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 28
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +14/+25
  Attack:                *+3 greatsword* +23 melee (3d6+13/19--20) or slam +20 melee (2d8+10)
  Full Attack:           *+3 greatsword* +23/+18/+13 melee (3d6+13/19--20) or slam +20 melee (2d8+10)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, spells
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/evil, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, immunity to acid, cold, and petrification, protective aura, regeneration 10, resistance to electricity 10 and fire 10, spell resistance 30, tongues
  Saves:                 Fort +14 (+18 against poison), Ref +13, Will +15
  Abilities:             Str 25, Dex 19, Con 20, Int 22, Wis 23, Cha 22
  Skills:                Concentration +22, Craft or Knowledge (any four) +23, Diplomacy +25, Escape Artist +21, Hide +17, Intimidate +23, Listen +23, Move Silently +21, Sense Motive +23, Search +23, Spot +23, Use Rope +4 (+6 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Cleave, Improved Initiative, Improved Sunder, Power Attack
  Environment:           Any good-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      16
  Treasure:              No coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always good (any)
  Advancement:           15--21 HD (Large); 22--42 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A planetar is nearly 9 feet tall and weighs about 500 pounds.

#### Combat {#angel-planetar--combat}

Despite their vast array of magical powers, planetars are likely to wade
into melee with their *+3 greatswords.* They particularly enjoy fighting
fiends.

A planetar's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Regeneration:** A planetar takes damage from evil-aligned weapons and
from spells and effects with the evil descriptor.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*continual flame, dispel magic, holy
smite* (DC 20), *invisibility* (self only), *lesser restoration* (DC
18), *remove curse* (DC 19), *remove disease* (DC 19), *remove fear* (DC
17), *speak with dead* (DC 19); 3/day---*blade barrier* (DC 22), *flame
strike* (DC 21), *polymorph* (self only), *power word stun, raise dead*,
*waves of fatigue*; 1/day---*earthquake* (DC 24), *greater restoration*
(DC 23), *mass charm monster* (DC 24)*, waves of exhaustion*. Caster
level 17th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

The following abilities are always active on the planetar's person, as
the spells (caster level 17th): *detect evil, detect snares and pits,
discern lies* (DC 20), *see invisibility*, and *true seeing*. They can
be dispelled, but the planetar can reactivate them as a free action.

**Spells:** Planetars can cast divine spells as 17th-level clerics. A
planetar has access to two of the following domains: Air, Destruction,
Good, Law, or War (plus any others from its deity). The save DCs are
Wisdom-based.

*Typical Cleric Spells Prepared* (6/8/8/7/7/6/6/4/3/2; save DC 16 +
spell level): 0---*create water, detect magic, guidance*, *resistance*
(2), *virtue;* 1st---*bless* (2), *cause fear, divine favor* (2),
*entropic shield, inflict light wounds\**, *shield of faith;*
2nd---*aid\*, align weapon, bear 's endurance*, *bull's strength* (2),
*consecrate, eagle's splendor, hold person;* 3rd---*contagion\*,
daylight, invisibility purge*, *prayer* (2), *summon monster III, wind
wall;* 4th--- *death ward*, *dismissal*, *inflict critical wounds\**,
*neutralize poison* (2), *summon monster IV;* 5th--- *break enchantment,
circle of doom*\*, *dispel evil, mark of justice, plane shift, righteous
might;* 6th---*banishment, greater dispel magic, harm\*, heal, heroes'
feast, mass cure moderate wounds;* 7th--- *dictum, disintegrate\*, holy
word*, *regenerate;* 8th---*holy aura\*, mass cure critical wounds,
shield of law*; 9th---*implosion, summon monster IX (good)\*.*

\*Domain spell. Domains: Destruction and Good.

### Angel, Solar

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Outsider (Angel, Extraplanar, Good)
  Hit Dice:              22d8+110 (209 hp)
  Initiative:            +9
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares), fly 150 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           35 (--1 size, +5 Dex, +21 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 30
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +22/+35
  Attack:                *+5 dancing greatsword* +35 melee (3d6+18/19--20) or *+2 composite longbow* (+5 Str bonus) +28 ranged (2d6+7/x3 plus slaying) or slam +30 melee (2d8+13)
  Full Attack:           *+5 dancing greatsword* +35/+30/+25/+20 melee (3d6+18/19--20) or *+2 composite longbow* (+5 Str bonus) +28/+23/+18/+13 ranged (2d6+7/x3 plus slaying) or slam +30 melee (2d8+13)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, spells
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 15/epic and evil, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, immunity to acid, cold, and petrification, protective aura, regeneration 15, resistance to electricity 10 and fire 10, spell resistance 32, tongues
  Saves:                 Fort +18 (+22 against poison), Ref +18, Will +20
  Abilities:             Str 28, Dex 20, Con 20, Int 23, Wis 25, Cha 25
  Skills:                Concentration +30, Craft or Knowledge (any five) +33, Diplomacy +34, Escape Artist +30, Hide +26, Listen +32, Move Silently +30, Search +31, Sense Motive +32, Spellcraft +31, Spot +32, Survival +7 (+9 following tracks), Use Rope +5 (+7 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Cleave, Dodge, Great Cleave, Improved Initiative, Improved Sunder, Mobility, Power Attack, Track
  Environment:           Any good-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary or pair
  Challenge Rating:      23
  Treasure:              No coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always good (any)
  Advancement:           23--33 HD (Large); 34--66 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A solar has a deep and commanding voice, and stands about 9 feet tall.
It weighs about 500 pounds.

#### Combat {#angel-solar--combat}

Solars are puissant champions of good. Only the most powerful fiends
approach their power.

Even more fearsome than their *+5 dancing greatswords* are their *+2
composite longbows* that create any sort of *slaying arrow* when drawn.

A solar's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated
as good-aligned and epic for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Regeneration (Ex):** A solar takes normal damage from epic
evil-aligned weapons, and from spells or effects with the evil
descriptor.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*aid, animate objects, commune,
continual flame, dimensional anchor, greater dispel magic, holy smite*
(DC 21),*imprisonment* (DC 26), *invisibility* (self only), *lesser
restoration* (DC 19), *polymorph* (self only) *power word stun, remove
curse* (DC 20), *remove disease* (DC 20), *remove fear* (DC 18), *resist
energy, summon monster VII, speak with dead* (DC 20)*, waves of
fatigue*; 3/day---*blade barrier* (DC 23), *earthquake* (DC 25), *heal*
(DC 23), *mass charm monster* (DC 25), *permanency, resurrection, waves
of exhaustion*; 1/day---*greater restoration* (DC 24), *power word
blind*, *power word kill*, *power word stun, prismatic spray* (DC 24),
*wish*. Caster level 20th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

The following abilities are always active on a solar's person, as the
spells (caster level 20th): *detect evil, detect snares and pits,
discern lies* (DC 21), *see invisibility, true seeing*. They can be
dispelled, but the solar can reactivate them as a free action.

**Spells:** Solars can cast divine spells as 20th-level clerics. A solar
has access to two of the following domains: Air, Destruction, Good, Law,
or War (plus any others from its deity). The save DCs are Wisdom-based.

*Typical Cleric Spells Prepared* (6/8/8/8/7/7/6/6/5/5; save DC 17 +
spell level): 0---*create water, detect magic, guidance* (2),
*resistance* (2); 1st---*bless* (2), *cause fear, divine favor* (2),
*entropic shield, obscuring mist*\*, *shield of faith;* 2nd---*align
weapon, bear's endurance* (2), *bull's strength* (2), *consecrate,
eagle's splendor, spiritual weapon*\*; 3rd---*daylight, invisibility
purge, magic circle against evil, magic vestment*\*, *prayer* (2),
*protection from energy, wind wall;* 4th---*death ward* (2), *dismissal*
(2), *divine power*\*, *neutralize poison* (2); 5th---*break
enchantment, control winds*\*, *dispel evil, plane shift, righteous
might* (2), *symbol of pain;* 6th---*banishment, chain lightning*\*,
*heroes' feast, mass cure moderate wounds, undeath to death, word of
recall;* 7th---*control weather*\*, *destruction, dictum, ethereal
jaunt, holy word, regenerate;* 8th---*fire storm, holy aura, mass cure
critical wounds* (2), *whirlwind*\*; 9th--- *etherealness, elemental
swarm (air)*\**, mass heal, miracle, storm of vengeance*.

\*Domain spell. Domains: Air and War.

## Animated Object

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Animated Object, Tiny                                                  Animated Object, Small                                                 Animated Object, Medium
                         Tiny Construct                                                         Small Construct                                                        Medium Construct
  Hit Dice:              1/2 d10 (2 hp)                                                         1d10+10 (15 hp)                                                        2d10+20 (31 hp)
  Initiative:            +2                                                                     +1                                                                     +0
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares); 50 ft. legs, 60 ft. multiple legs; 80 ft. wheels   30 ft. (6 squares); 40 ft. legs, 50 ft. multiple legs, 70 ft. wheels   30 ft. (6 squares); 40 ft. legs, 50 ft. multiple legs, 70 ft. wheels
  Armor Class:           14 (+2 size, +2 Dex), touch 14, flat-footed 12                         14 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +2 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13             14 (+4 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +0/--9                                                                 +0/--4                                                                 +1/+2
  Attack:                Slam +1 melee (1d3--1)                                                 Slam +1 melee (1d4)                                                    Slam +2 melee (1d6+1)
  Full Attack:           Slam +1 melee (1d3--1)                                                 Slam +1 melee (1d4)                                                    Slam +2 melee (1d6+1)
  Space/Reach:           2-1/2 ft./0 ft.                                                        5 ft./5 ft.                                                            5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       See text                                                               See text                                                               See text
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision; also see text   Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision; also see text   Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision; also see text
  Saves:                 Fort +0, Ref +2, Will --5                                              Fort +0, Ref +1, Will --5                                              Fort +0, Ref +0, Will --5
  Abilities:             Str 8, Dex 14, Con ---, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1                          Str 10, Dex 12, Con ---, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1                         Str 12, Dex 10, Con ---, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1
  Skills:                ---                                                                    ---                                                                    ---
  Feats:                 ---                                                                    ---                                                                    ---
  Environment:           Any                                                                    Any                                                                    Any
  Organization:          Group (4)                                                              Pair                                                                   Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      1/2                                                                    1                                                                      2
  Treasure:              None                                                                   None                                                                   None
  Alignment:             Always neutral                                                         Always neutral                                                         Always neutral
  Advancement:           ---                                                                    ---                                                                    ---
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                    ---                                                                    ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Animated        | Animated        | Animated        |
|                 | Object, Large   | Object, Huge    | Object,         |
|                 |                 |                 | Gargantuan      |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Large Construct | Huge Construct  | Gargantuan      |
|                 |                 |                 | Construct       |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Hit Dice:       | 4d10+30 (52 hp) | 8d10+40 (84 hp) | 16d10+60 (148   |
|                 |                 |                 | hp)             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Initiative:     | +0              | --1             | --2             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Speed:          | 20 ft. (4       | 20 ft. (4       | 10 ft. (2       |
|                 | squares); 30    | squares); 30    | squares); 20    |
|                 | ft. legs, 40    | ft. legs, 40    | ft. legs, 30    |
|                 | ft. multiple    | ft. multiple    | ft. multiple    |
|                 | legs, 60 ft.    | legs, 60 ft.    | legs, 50 ft.    |
|                 | wheels          | wheels          | wheels          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Armor Class:    | 14 (--1 size,   | 13 (--2 size,   | 12 (--4 size,   |
|                 | +5 natural),    | --1 Dex, +6     | --2 Dex, +8     |
|                 | touch 9,        | natural), touch | natural), touch |
|                 | flat-footed 14  | 7, flat-footed  | 4, flat-footed  |
|                 |                 | 13              | 12              |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Base            | +3/+10          | +6/+19          | +12/+31         |
| Attack/Grapple: |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Attack:         | Slam +5 melee   | Slam +9 melee   | Slam +15 melee  |
|                 | (1d8+4)         | (2d6+7)         | (2d8+10)        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Full Attack:    | Slam +5 melee   | Slam +9 melee   | Slam +15 melee  |
|                 | (1d8+4)         | (2d6+7)         | (2d8+10)        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Space/Reach:    | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 10 ft./5 ft.    | 15 ft./10 ft.   | 20 ft./15 ft.   |
|                 | (long)          | (long)          | (long)          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | <div>           | <div>           | <div>           |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | 10 ft./10 ft.   | 15 ft./15 ft.   | 20 ft./20 ft.   |
|                 | (tall)          | (tall)          | (tall)          |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | </div>          | </div>          | </div>          |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Special         | See text        | See text        | See text        |
| Attacks:        |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Special         | Construct       | Construct       | Construct       |
| Qualities:      | traits,         | traits,         | traits,         |
|                 | darkvision 60   | darkvision 60   | darkvision 60   |
|                 | ft., low-light  | ft., low-light  | ft., low-light  |
|                 | vision; also    | vision; also    | vision; also    |
|                 | see text        | see text        | see text        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Saves:          | Fort +1, Ref    | Fort +2, Ref    | Fort +5, Ref    |
|                 | +1, Will --4    | +1, Will --3    | +3, Will +0     |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Abilities:      | Str 16, Dex 10, | Str 20, Dex 8,  | Str 24, Dex 6,  |
|                 | Con ---, Int    | Con ---, Int    | Con ---, Int    |
|                 | ---, Wis 1, Cha | ---, Wis 1, Cha | ---, Wis 1, Cha |
|                 | 1               | 1               | 1               |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Skills:         | ---             | ---             | ---             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Feats:          | ---             | ---             | ---             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Environment:    | Any             | Any             | Any             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Organization:   | Solitary        | Solitary        | Solitary        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Challenge       | 3               | 5               | 7               |
| Rating:         |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Treasure:       | None            | None            | None            |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Alignment:      | Always neutral  | Always neutral  | Always neutral  |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Advancement:    | ---             | ---             | ---             |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Level           | ---             | ---             | ---             |
| Adjustment:     |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Animated Object, Colossal
                         Colossal Construct
  Hit Dice:              32d10+80 (256 hp)
  Initiative:            --3
  Speed:                 10 ft. (2 squares); 20 ft. legs, 30 ft. multiple legs, 50 ft. wheels
  Armor Class:           11 (--8 size, --3 Dex, +12 natural), touch --1, flat-footed 11
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +24/+49
  Attack:                Slam +25 melee (4d6+13)
  Full Attack:           Slam +25 melee (4d6+13)
  Space/Reach:           30 ft./20 ft. (long) 30 ft./30 ft. (tall)
  Special Attacks:       See text
  Special Qualities:     Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision; also see text
  Saves:                 Fort +10, Ref +7, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 28, Dex 4, Con ---, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1
  Skills:                ---
  Feats:                 ---
  Environment:           Any
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      10
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           ---
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Animated objects come in all sizes, shapes, and colors. They owe their
existence as creatures to spells such as *animate objects* or similar
supernatural abilities.

### Combat {#animated-object--combat}

Animated objects fight only as directed by the animator. They follow
orders without question and to the best of their abilities. Since they
do not need to breathe and never tire, they can be extremely capable
minions.

An animated object can have one or more of the following special
abilities, depending on its form.

**Blind (Ex):** A sheetlike animated object such as a carpet or tapestry
can grapple an opponent up to three sizes larger than itself. The object
makes a normal grapple check. If it wins, it wraps itself around the
opponent's head, causing that creature to be blinded until removed.

**Constrict (Ex):** A flexible animated object such as a rope, vine, or
rug deals damage equal to its slam damage value plus 1- 1/2 times its
Strength bonus with a successful grapple check against a creature up to
one size larger than itself.

An object of at least Large size can make constriction attacks against
multiple creatures at once, if they all are at least two sizes smaller
than the object and can fit under it.

**Hardness (Ex):** An animated object has the same hardness it had
before it was animated.

**Improved Speed (Ex):** The base land speed given in the statistics
block assume that an animated object lurches, rocks, or slithers along.

Objects with two legs (statues, ladders) or a similar shape that allows
faster movement have a +10 foot bonus to speed. Objects with multiple
legs (tables, chairs) have a +20 foot bonus to speed. Wheeled objects
have a +40 foot bonus to speed.

Objects might have additional modes of movement. A wooden object can
float and has a swim speed equal to half its land speed. A rope or
similar sinuous object has a climb speed equal to half its land speed. A
sheetlike object can fly (clumsy maneuverability) at half its normal
speed.

**Trample (Ex):** An animated object of at least Large size and with a
hardness of at least 10 can trample creatures two or more sizes smaller
than itself, dealing damage equal to the object's slam damage + 1-1/2
times its Strength bonus. Opponents who do not make attacks of
opportunity against the object can attempt Reflex saves (DC 10 + 1/2
object's HD + object's Str modifier) to halve the damage.

## Ankheg

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Magical Beast
  Hit Dice:              3d10+12 (28 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), burrow 20 ft.
  Armor Class:           18 (--1 size, +9 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+12
  Attack:                Bite +7 melee (2d6+7 plus 1d4 acid)
  Full Attack:           Bite +7 melee (2d6+7 plus 1d4 acid)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Improved grab, spit acid
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, tremorsense 60 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +6, Ref +3, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 21, Dex 10, Con 17, Int 1, Wis 13, Cha 6
  Skills:                Climb +8, Listen +6, Spot +3
  Feats:                 Alertness, Toughness
  Environment:           Warm plains
  Organization:          Solitary or cluster (2--4)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           4 HD (Large); 5--9 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------

The ankheg is a burrowing monster with a taste for fresh meat. An ankheg
has six legs, and some specimens are yellow rather than brown. It is
about 10 feet long and weighs about 800 pounds.

An ankheg burrows with legs and mandibles. A burrowing ankheg usually
does not make a usable tunnel, but can construct a tunnel; it burrows at
half speed when it does so. It often digs a winding tunnel up to 40 feet
below the surface in the rich soil of forests or farmlands. The tunnel
is 5 feet tall and wide, and from 60 to 150 feet long (\[1d10 + 5\] x
10).

### Combat {#ankheg--combat}

An ankheg usually lies 5 to 10 feet below the surface until its antennae
detect the approach of prey. It then burrows up to attack. (Treat this
as a charge, even though the ankheg does not need to move 10 feet before
attacking.)

Clusters of ankhegs share the same territory but do not cooperate.

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, an ankheg must hit with its
bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action
without provoking an attack of opportunity. If the ankheg is damaged
after grabbing its prey, it retreats backward down its tunnel at its
land speed (not its burrow speed), dragging the victim with it.

**Spit Acid (Ex):** 30-ft. line, once every 6 hours; damage 4d4 acid,
Reflex DC 14 half. One such attack depletes the ankheg's acid supply for
6 hours. It cannot spit acid or deal acid damage during this time. The
save DC is Constitution-based.

An ankheg does not use this ability unless it is desperate or
frustrated. It most often spits acid when reduced to fewer than half its
full normal hit points or when it has not successfully grabbed an
opponent.

## Aranea

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Magical Beast (Shapechanger)
  Hit Dice:              3d10+6 (22 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares), climb 25 ft.
  Armor Class:           13 (+2 Dex, +1 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 11
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+3
  Attack:                Bite +5 melee (1d6 plus poison) or web +5 ranged
  Full Attack:           Bite +5 melee (1d6 plus poison) or web +5 ranged
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison, spells, web
  Special Qualities:     Change shape, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision
  Saves:                 Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +4
  Abilities:             Str 11, Dex 15, Con 14, Int 14, Wis 13, Cha 14
  Skills:                Climb +14, Concentration +8, Escape Artist +5, Jump +13, Listen +6, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative, Iron Will^B^, Weapon Finesse
  Environment:           Temperate forests
  Organization:          Solitary or colony (3--6)
  Challenge Rating:      4
  Treasure:              Standard coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +4
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

An aranea is an intelligent, shapechanging spider with sorcerous powers.
In its natural form, an aranea resembles a big spider, with a humpbacked
body a little bigger than a human torso. It has fanged mandibles like a
normal spider. Two small arms, each about 2 feet long, lie below the
mandibles. Each arm has a hand with four many-jointed fingers and a
double-jointed thumb.

An aranea weighs about 150 pounds. The hump on its back houses its
brain.

Araneas speak Common and Sylvan.

### Combat {#aranea--combat}

An aranea avoids physical combat and uses its webs and spells when it
can. In a battle, it tries to immobilize or distract the most aggressive
opponents first. Araneas often subdue opponents for ransom.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 13, initial damage 1d6 Str,
secondary damage 2d6 Str. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Spells:** An aranea casts spells as a 3rd-level sorcerer. It prefers
illusions and enchantments and avoids fire spells.

*Typical Sorcerer Spells Known* (6/6; save DC 12 + spell level): 0---
*daze, detect magic, ghost sound, light, resistance;* 1st---*mage armor,
silent image, sleep.*

**Web (Ex):** In spider or hybrid form (see below), an aranea can throw
a web up to six times per day. This is similar to an attack with a net
but has a maximum range of 50 feet, with a range increment of 10 feet,
and is effective against targets of up to Large size. The web anchors
the target in place, allowing no movement.

An entangled creature can escape with a DC 13 Escape Artist check or
burst the web with a DC 17 Strength check. The check DCs are
Constitution-based, and the Strength check DC includes a +4 racial
bonus. The web has 6 hit points, hardness 0, and takes double damage
from fire.

**Change Shape (Su):** An aranea's natural form is that of a Medium
monstrous spider. It can assume two other forms. The first is a unique
Small or Medium humanoid; an aranea in its humanoid form always assumes
the same appearance and traits, much as a lycanthrope would. In humanoid
form, an aranea cannot use its bite attack, webs, or poison.

The second form is a Medium spider--humanoid hybrid. In hybrid form, an
aranea looks like a Medium humanoid at first glance, but a DC 18 Spot
check reveals the creature's fangs and spinnerets. The aranea retains
its bite attack, webs, and poison in this form, and can also wield
weapons or wear armor. When in hybrid form, an aranea's speed is 30 feet
(6 squares).

An aranea remains in one form until it chooses to assume a new one. A
change in form cannot be dispelled, nor does an aranea revert to its
natural form when killed. A *true seeing* spell, however, reveals its
natural form if it is in humanoid or hybrid form.

**Skills:** Araneas have a +2 racial bonus on Jump, Listen, and Spot
checks. They have a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always
choose to take 10 on Climb checks even if rushed or threatened.

## Archon

Archons are celestials from a lawful good-aligned plane.

Archons speak Celestial, Infernal, and Draconic, but can speak with
almost any creature because of their tongues ability.

### Combat {#archon--combat}

Archons generally prefer to meet a foe head-on if it is prudent to do
so, but if outmatched, they do what they can to even the odds (usually
by employing hit-and run tactics or standing off and engaging a foe with
magic before moving into melee).

**Archon Traits:** An archon possesses the following traits (unless
otherwise noted in a creature's entry).

---Darkvision out to 60 feet and low-light vision.

---*Aura of Menace (Su):* A righteous aura surrounds archons that fight
or get angry. Any hostile creature within a 20-foot radius of an archon
must succeed on a Will save to resist its effects. The save DC varies
with the type of archon, is Charisma-based, and includes a +2 racial
bonus. Those who fail take a --2 penalty on attacks, AC, and saves for
24 hours or until they successfully hit the archon that generated the
aura. A creature that has resisted or broken the effect cannot be
affected again by the same archon's aura for 24 hours.

---Immunity to electricity and petrification.

--- +4 racial bonus on saves against poison.

---*Magic Circle against Evil (Su):* A magic circle against evil effect
always surrounds an archon (caster level equals the archon's Hit Dice).
(The defensive benefits from the circle are not included in an archon's
statistics block.)

---*Teleport (Su):* Archons can use greater teleport at will, as the
spell (caster level 14th), except that the creature can transport only
itself and up to 50 pounds of objects.

---*Tongues (Su):* All archons can speak with any creature that has a
language, as though using a *tongues* spell (caster level 14th). This
ability is always active.

### Lantern Archon

  ----------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Small Outsider (Archon, Extraplanar, Good, Lawful)
  Hit Dice :              1d8 (4 hp)
  Initiative :            +4
  Speed :                 Fly 60 ft. (perfect) (12 squares)
  Armor Class :           15 (+1 size, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple :   +1/--8
  Attack :                Light ray +2 ranged touch (1d6)
  Full Attack :           2 light rays +2 ranged touch (1d6)
  Space/Reach :           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks :       Spell-like abilities
  Special Qualities :     Aura of menace, damage reduction 10/evil and magic, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and petrification, magic circle against evil, teleport, tongues
  Saves :                 Fort +2 (+6 against poison), Ref +2, Will +2
  Abilities :             Str 1, Dex 11, Con 10, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 10
  Skills :                Concentration +4, Diplomacy +4, Knowledge (the planes) +2, Listen +4, Sense Motive +4, Spot +4
  Feats :                 Improved Initiative
  Environment :           A lawful good-aligned plane
  Organization :          Solitary, pair, or squad (3--5)
  Challenge Rating :      2
  Treasure :              None
  Alignment :             Always lawful good
  Advancement :           2--4 HD (Small)
  Level Adjustment:       ---
  ----------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lantern archons appear as floating balls of light that glow about as
brightly as a torch. Only their destruction can extinguish the glow,
though they can try to hide it.

#### Combat {#lantern-archon--combat}

A lantern archon has little reason to get within melee range. It usually
hovers just close enough to bring the enemy within its aura of menace,
then blasts away with its light rays. Lantern archons prefer to
concentrate on a single opponent, seeking to reduce enemy numbers
quickly.

**Aura of Menace (Su):** Will DC 12 negates.

**Light Ray (Ex):** A lantern archon's light rays have a range of 30
feet. This attack overcomes damage reduction of any type.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*aid, detect evil, continual flame.*
Caster level 3rd.

### Hound Archon

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Hound Archon                                                                                                                                                                                     Hound Archon Hero, 11th-Level Paladin
                         Medium Outsider (Archon, Extraplanar, Good, Lawful)                                                                                                                                              Medium Outsider (Archon, Extraplanar, Good, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              6d8+6 (33 hp)                                                                                                                                                                                    6d8+18 plus 11d10+33 (143 hp)
  Initiative:            +4                                                                                                                                                                                               +4
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)                                                                                                                                                                               30 ft. in full plate armor (6 squares); base speed 40 ft.
  Armor Class:           19 (+9 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19                                                                                                                                                        30 (+9 natural, +11 *+3 full plate armor*), touch 10, flat-footed 30
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +6/+8                                                                                                                                                                                            +17/+22
  Attack:                Bite +8 melee (1d8+2) or greatsword +8 melee (2d6+3/19--20)                                                                                                                                      *+2 cold iron greatsword* +25 melee (2d6+9/19--20) or bite +22 melee (1d8+5)
  Full Attack:           Bite +8 melee (1d8+2) and slam +3 melee (1d4+1); or greatsword +8/+3 melee (2d6+3/19--20) and bite +3 melee (1d8+1)                                                                              *+2 cold iron greatsword* +25/+20/+15/+10 melee (2d6+9/19--20) and bite +17 melee (1d8+2); or bite +22 melee (1d8+5) and slam +17 melee (1d4+2)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                                                                                                                                                      5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities                                                                                                                                                                             Smite evil, spells, spell-like abilities, turn undead 6/day
  Special Qualities:     Aura of menace, change shape, damage reduction 10/evil, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and petrification, magic circle against evil, scent, spell resistance 16, teleport, tongues   Aura of menace, change shape, damage reduction 10/evil, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and petrification, magic circle against evil, paladin abilities, scent, spell resistance 27, teleport, tongues
  Saves:                 Fort +6 (+10 against poison), Ref +5, Will +6                                                                                                                                                    Fort +18 (+22 against poison), Ref +11, Will +13
  Abilities:             Str 15, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 12                                                                                                                                                   Str 21, Dex 10, Con 16, Int 8, Wis 14, Cha 16
  Skills:                Concentration +10, Diplomacy +3, Hide +9\*, Jump +15, Listen +10, Move Silently +9, Sense Motive +10, Spot +10, Survival +10\* (+12 following tracks)                                            Concentration +20, Diplomacy +19, Hide +2\*, Jump +0, Listen +10, Ride +14, Sense Motive +19, Spot +10, Survival +2\*
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative, Power Attack, Track                                                                                                                                                         Improved Initiative, Leadership, Mounted Combat, Ride-By Attack, Track, Weapon Focus (greatsword)
  Environment            A lawful good-aligned plane                                                                                                                                                                      A lawful good-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or squad (3--5)                                                                                                                                                                  Solitary or with juvenile bronze dragon
  Challenge Rating:      4                                                                                                                                                                                                16
  Treasure:              No coins; double goods; standard items                                                                                                                                                           Standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful good                                                                                                                                                                               Always lawful good
  Advancement:           7--9 HD (Medium); 10--18 HD (Large)                                                                                                                                                              By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +5                                                                                                                                                                                               +5
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hound archons look like well-muscled humans with canine heads.

#### Combat {#hound-archon--combat}

Hound archons prefer to attack with their natural weapons but
occasionally use greatswords.

A hound archon's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as good-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*aid, continual flame, detect evil,
message.* Caster level 6th.

**Aura of Menace (Su):** Will DC 16 negates.

**Change Shape (Su):** A hound archon can assume any canine form of
Small to Large size. While in canine form, the hound archon loses its
bite, slam, and greatsword attacks, but gains the bite attack of the
form it chooses. For the purposes of this ability, canines include any
doglike or wolflike animal of the animal type.

**Skills:** \*While in canine form, a hound archon gains a +4
circumstance bonus on Hide and Survival checks.

### Hound Archon Hero

The hound archon hero is a mighty champion of justice, devoted to the
pursuit and destruction of evil in all its forms.

#### Combat {#hound-archon-hero--combat}

Hound archon heroes have over time developed a love for their weapons.
They prefer to use their *holy greatswords* over their bite and slam
attacks.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*aid, continual flame, detect evil,
message.* Caster level 6th.

**Aura of Menace (Su):** The save DC for the hound archon hero's aura of
menace (DC 18) is adjusted for its higher Charisma score.

**Smite Evil (Su):** Three times per day a hound archon hero can make a
normal melee attack with a +3 bonus that deals an extra 11 points of
damage against an evil foe.

**Change Shape (Su):** A hound archon hero can assume any canine form of
Small to Large size. While in canine form, the hound archon loses its
bite, slam, and greatsword attacks, but gains the bite attack of the
form it chooses. For the purposes of this ability, canines include any
doglike or wolflike animal of the animal type.

**Skills:** \*While in canine form, a hound archon hero gains a +4
circumstance bonus on Hide and Survival checks.

**Paladin Abilities:** Aura of courage, aura of good, *detect evil*,
divine grace, divine health, lay on hands (33 points/day), *remove
disease* 2/week, special mount (juvenile bronze dragon).

*Typical Paladin Spells Prepared* (2/2; save DC 12 + spell level):
1st--- *divine favor*, *protection from evil;* 2nd---*bull's strength,
eagle's splendor.*

Possessions: +3 full plate armor, +2 cold iron greatsword.

### Hound Archon Hero Mounts

In the course of their adventures, many hound archon heroes befriend
bronze dragons, which may come to serve as their mounts. The
relationship between these mounts and their celestial riders goes beyond
even the special bond between paladin and mount. The dragon and the
archon are naturally allies and friends, as can be expected of two
powerful servants of cosmic justice. The juvenile bronze dragon mount
gains 2 additional HD, 4 points of Strength, an additional 4 points of
natural armor, improved evasion, and +10 feet to speed in all its
movement forms. The dragon cannot, however, command other creatures of
its type as other kinds of paladin mounts can.

### Hound Archons as Characters

Hound archon characters possess the following racial traits.

--- +4 Strength, +2 Constitution, +2 Wisdom, +2 Charisma.

---Medium size.

---A hound archon's base land speed is 40 feet.

---Racial Hit Dice: A hound archon begins with six levels of outsider,
which provide 6d8 Hit Dice, a base attack bonus of +6, and base saving
throw bonuses of Fort +5, Ref +5, and Will +5.

---Racial Skills: A hound archon's outsider levels give it skill points
equal to 9 × (8 + Int modifier). Its class skills are Concentration,
Hide, Jump, Listen, Move Silently, Sense Motive, Spot, and Survival.

---Racial Feats: A hound archon's outsider levels give it three feats.

--- +9 natural armor bonus.

---Natural Weapons: Bite (1d8) and slam (1d4).

---Archon Traits (see page 16): Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision,
aura of menace (Will DC 15 + character's Cha modifier), immunity to
electricity and petrification, +4 racial bonus on saves against poison,
magic circle against evil, teleport, tongues.

---Special Attacks: Spell-like abilities.

---Special Qualities: Change shape, damage reduction 10/evil, scent,
spell resistance equal to 16 + class levels.

---Automatic Languages: Celestial. Bonus Languages: Common, Draconic,
Infernal.

---Favored class: Ranger.

---Level adjustment +5.

### Trumpet Archon

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Archon, Extraplanar, Good, Lawful)
  Hit Dice:              12d8+72 (126 hp)
  Initiative:            +7
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), fly 90 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           27 (+3 Dex, +14 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 24
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+17
  Attack:                *+4 greatsword* +21 melee (2d6+11/19--20)
  Full Attack:           *+4 greatsword* +21/+16/+11 melee (2d6+11/19--20)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, spells, trumpet
  Special Qualities:     Aura of menace, damage reduction 10/evil, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and petrification, magic circle against evil, spell resistance 29, teleport, tongues
  Saves:                 Fort +14 (+18 against poison), Ref +11, Will +11
  Abilities:             Str 20, Dex 17, Con 23, Int 16, Wis 16, Cha 16
  Skills:                Concentration +21, Diplomacy +20, Escape Artist +18, Handle Animal +18, Knowledge (any one) +18, Listen +18, Move Silently +18, Perform (wind instruments) +18, Ride +20, Sense Motive +18, Spot +18, Use Rope +3 (+5 with bindings)
  Feats:                 Blind-Fight, Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Improved Initiative, Power Attack
  Environment:           A lawful good-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or squad (3--5)
  Challenge Rating:      14
  Treasure:              No coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always lawful good
  Advancement:           13--18 HD (Medium); 19--36 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      +8
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each Trumpet Archon carries a gleaming silver trumpet about 6 feet long.

#### Combat {#trumpet-archon--combat}

A trumpet archon usually disdains physical combat, preferring to
obliterate foes with spells quickly and return to its duties. If forced
into an extended battle, it sounds its trumpet and attacks with a
vengeance.

A trumpet archon's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields,
are treated as good-aligned and lawful-aligned for the purpose of
overcoming damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*detect evil, continual flame,
message.* Caster level 12th.

**Aura of Menace (Su):** Will DC 21 negates.

**Spells:** Trumpet archons can cast divine spells as 14th-level
clerics. A trumpet archon has access to two of the following domains:
Air, Destruction, Good, Law, or War (plus any others from its deity).
The save DCs are Wisdom-based.

*Typical Cleric Spells Prepared* (6/7/7/6/5/4/4/3; DC 13 + spell level):
0---*detect magic, light, purify food and drink, read magic, resistance*
(2); 1st---*bless* (2), *divine favor* (2), *protection from chaos\*,
sanctuary, shield of faith;* 2nd---*aid\*, bull's strength* (2),
*consecrate, lesser restoration, owl's wisdom* (2); 3rd---*daylight,
invisibility purge, magic circle against chaos\*, magic vestment,
protection from energy* (2); 4th--- *dismissal, divine power, holy
smite\*, neutralize poison, spell immunity;* 5th---*dispel evil\*, mass
cure light wounds, plane shift, raise dead;* 6th--- *blade barrier\*,
banishment, heal, undeath to death;* 7th---*dictum\*, holy word, mass
cure serious wounds.*

\*Domain spell. Domains: Good and Law.

**Trumpet (Su):** An archon's trumpet produces music of utter clarity,
piercing beauty, and, if the trumpet archon wills it, paralyzing awe.
All creatures except archons within 100 feet of the blast must succeed
on a DC 19 Fortitude save or be paralyzed for 1d4 rounds. The save DC is
Charisma-based. The archon can also command its trumpet to become a *+4
greatsword* as a free action.

If a trumpet is ever stolen, it becomes a chunk of useless metal until
the owner can recover it. Woe betide any thief caught with one.

## Arrowhawk

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Juvenile Arrowhawk                                                                                                                                                                                                  Adult Arrowhawk                                                                                                                                                                                                             Elder Arrowhawk
                         Small Outsider (Air, Extraplanar)                                                                                                                                                                                   Medium Outsider (Air, Extraplanar)                                                                                                                                                                                          Large Outsider (Air, Extraplanar)
  Hit Dice:              3d8+3 (16 hp)                                                                                                                                                                                                       7d8+7 (38 hp)                                                                                                                                                                                                               15d8+45 (112 hp)
  Initiative:            +5                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +5                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +5
  Speed:                 Fly 60 ft. (perfect) (12 squares)                                                                                                                                                                                   Fly 60 ft. (perfect) (12 squares)                                                                                                                                                                                           Fly 60 ft. (perfect) (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           20 (+1 size, +5 Dex, +4 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 15                                                                                                                                                          21 (+5 Dex, +6 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 16                                                                                                                                                                           22 (--1 size, +5 Dex, +8 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+0                                                                                                                                                                                                               +7/+9                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +15/+25
  Attack:                Electricity ray +9 ranged touch (2d6) or bite +9 melee (1d6+1)                                                                                                                                                      Electricity ray +12 ranged touch (2d8) or bite +12 melee (1d8+3)                                                                                                                                                            Electricity ray +19 ranged touch (2d8) or bite +21 melee (2d6+9)
  Full Attack:           Electricity ray +9 ranged touch (2d6) or bite +9 melee (1d6+1)                                                                                                                                                      Electricity ray +12 ranged touch (2d8) or bite +12 melee (1d8+3)                                                                                                                                                            Electricity ray +19 ranged touch (2d8) or bite +20 melee (2d6+9)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                                                                                                                                                                         5 ft./5 ft.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Electricity ray                                                                                                                                                                                                     Electricity ray                                                                                                                                                                                                             Electricity ray
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to acid, electricity, and poison, resistance to cold 10 and fire 10                                                                                                                     Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to acid, electricity, and poison, resistance to cold 10 and fire 10                                                                                                                             Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to acid, electricity, and poison, resistance to cold 10 and fire 10
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +8, Will +4                                                                                                                                                                                            Fort +6, Ref +10, Will +6                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fort +12, Ref +14, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 12, Dex 21, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 13                                                                                                                                                                      Str 14, Dex 21, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 13                                                                                                                                                                              Str 22, Dex 21, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 13
  Skills:                Diplomacy +3, Escape Artist +11, Knowledge (the planes) +6, Listen +7, Move Silently +11, Search +6, Sense Motive +7, Spot +7, Survival +7 (+9 following tracks, +9 Plane of Air), Use Rope +5 (+7 with bindings)   Diplomacy +3, Escape Artist +15, Knowledge (the planes) +10, Listen +11, Move Silently +15, Search +10, Sense Motive +11, Spot +11, Survival +11 (+13 following tracks, +13 Plane of Air), Use Rope +5 (+7 with bindings)   Diplomacy +3, Escape Artist +23, Knowledge (the planes) +18, Listen +21, Move Silently +23, Search +18, Sense Motive +19, Spot +21, Survival +19 (+21 following tracks, +21 Plane of Air), Use Rope +5 (+7 involving bindings)
  Feats:                 Dodge, Weapon Finesse                                                                                                                                                                                               Dodge, Flyby Attack, Weapon Finesse                                                                                                                                                                                         Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Flyby Attack, Weapon Finesse, Weapon Focus (bite)^B^
  Environment            Elemental Plane of Air                                                                                                                                                                                              Elemental Plane of Air                                                                                                                                                                                                      Elemental Plane of Air
  Organization:          Solitary or clutch (2--4)                                                                                                                                                                                           Solitary or clutch (2--4)                                                                                                                                                                                                   Solitary or clutch (2--4)
  Challenge Rating:      3                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
  Treasure:              None                                                                                                                                                                                                                None                                                                                                                                                                                                                        None
  Alignment:             Always neutral                                                                                                                                                                                                      Always neutral                                                                                                                                                                                                              Always neutral
  Advancement:           4--6 HD (Small)                                                                                                                                                                                                     8--14 HD (Medium)                                                                                                                                                                                                           16--24 HD (Large); 25--32 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An arrowhawk is a predator and scavenger from the Elemental Plane of
Air. By twisting its body and varying the cadence of its wingbeats, an
arrowhawk can fly at top speed in any direction. A juvenile arrowhawk (1
to 10 years old) is about 5 feet long from beak to tail, with the body
accounting for about one-third of that length. Its wingspan is about 7
feet, and it weighs about 20 pounds. An adult (11 to 40 years old) is
about 10 feet long from beak to tail, with a wingspan of about 15 feet
and a weight of about 100 pounds. An elder arrowhawk (41 to 75 years
old) is about 20 feet long with a wingspan of 30 feet and a weight of
about 800 pounds.

Arrowhawks speak Auran, but they are not usually talkative creatures.

### Combat {#arrowhawk--combat}

Arrowhawks are extremely territorial and always hungry. They attack
almost any other creature they meet, seeking a meal or trying to drive
away a rival. The primary mode of attack is an electricity ray, fired
from the tail. The creature also bites, but it prefers to stay out of
reach.

**Electricity Ray (Su):** An arrowhawk can fire this ray once per round,
with a range of 50 feet.

## Assassin Vine

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Plant
  Hit Dice:              4d8+12 (30 hp)
  Initiative:            +0
  Speed:                 5 ft. (1 square)
  Armor Class:           15 (--1 size, +6 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 15
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+12
  Attack:                Slam +7 melee (1d6+7)
  Full Attack:           Slam +7 melee (1d6+7)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft. (20 ft. with vine)
  Special Attacks:       Constrict 1d6+7, entangle, improved grab
  Special Qualities:     Blindsight 30 ft., camouflage, immunity to electricity, low-light vision, plant traits, resistance to cold 10 and fire 10
  Saves:                 Fort +7, Ref +1, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 20, Dex 10, Con 16, Int ---, Wis 13, Cha 9
  Environment:           Temperate forests
  Organization:          Solitary or patch (2--4)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              1/10th coins; 50% goods; 50% items
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           5--16 HD (Huge); 17--32 HD (Gargantuan); 33+ HD (Colossal)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The assassin vine is a semi-mobile plant that collects its own grisly
fertilizer by grabbing and crushing animals and depositing the carcasses
near its roots.

A mature plant consists of a main vine, about 20 feet long. Smaller
vines up to 5 feet long branch off from the main vine about every 6
inches. These small vines bear clusters of leaves, and in late summer
they produce bunches of small fruits that resemble wild grapes. The
fruit is tough and has a hearty but bitter flavor. Assassin vine berries
make a heady wine.

An assassin vine can move about, albeit very slowly, but usually stays
put unless it needs to seek prey in a new vicinity.

A subterranean version of the assassin vine grows near hot springs,
volcanic vents, and other sources of thermal energy. These plants have
thin, wiry stems and gray leaves shot through with silver, brown, and
white veins so that they resemble mineral deposits. An assassin vine
growing underground usually generates enough offal to support a thriving
colony of mushrooms and other fungi, which spring up around the plant
and help conceal it.

### Combat {#assassin-vine--combat}

An assassin vine uses simple tactics:

It lies still until prey comes within reach, then attacks. It uses its
entangle ability both to catch prey and to deter counterattacks.

**Constrict (Ex):** An assassin vine deals 1d6+7 points of damage with a
successful grapple check.

**Entangle (Su):** An assassin vine can animate plants within 30 feet of
itself as a free action (Ref DC 13 partial).

The effect lasts until the vine dies or decides to end it (also a free
action). The save DC is Wisdom-based. The ability is otherwise similar
to *entangle* (caster level 4th).

**Improved Grab (Ex):** To use this ability, an assassin vine must hit
with its slam attack.

It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without
provoking an attack of opportunity.

If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict.

**Blindsight (Ex):** Assassin vines have no visual organs but can
ascertain all foes within 30 feet using sound, scent, and vibration.

**Camouflage (Ex):** Since an assassin vine looks like a normal plant
when at rest, it takes a DC 20 Spot check to notice it before it
attacks.

Anyone with ranks in Survival or Knowledge (nature) can use one of those
skills instead of Spot to notice the plant. Dwarves can use stonecunning
to notice the subterranean version.

## Athach

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Aberration
  Hit Dice:              14d8+70 (133 hp)
  Initiative:            +1
  Speed:                 35 ft. in hide armor (7 squares); base speed 50 ft.
  Armor Class:           20 (--2 size, +1 Dex, +3 hide armor, +8 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 19
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +10/+26 Attack:Morningstar +16 melee (3d6+8) or rock +9 ranged (2d6+8)
  Full Attack:           Morningstar +12/+7 melee (3d6+8), and 2 morningstars +12 melee (3d6+4), and bite +12 melee (2d8+4 plus poison); or rock +5 ranged (2d6+8), and 2 rocks +5 ranged (2d6+4)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +5, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 26, Dex 13, Con 21, Int 7, Wis 12, Cha 6
  Skills:                Climb +9, Jump +18, Listen +7, Spot +7
  Feats:                 Alertness, Cleave, Multiweapon Fighting, Power Attack, Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           Temperate hills
  Organization:          Solitary, gang (2--4), or tribe (7--12)
  Challenge Rating:      8
  Treasure:              1/2 coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Often chaotic evil
  Advancement:           15--28 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +5
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The athach is a hulking, misshapen biped. An adult stands some 18 feet
tall and weighs about 4,500 pounds. Athachs speak a crude dialect of
Giant.

### Combat {#athach--combat}

Athachs charge into melee combat unless their opponents are out of
reach, in which case they throw rocks. They sometimes try to overrun
armored opponents to reach unarmored opponents in back ranks. With its
first few melee attacks, an athach tends to flail about
indiscriminately. After a few rounds, it concentrates on foes that have
been hitting it most often and uses its bite on whoever has dealt it the
most damage.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 22, initial damage 1d6 Str,
secondary damage 2d6 Str. The save DC is Constitution-based.

## Avoral

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Outsider (Extraplanar, Good)
  Hit Dice:              7d8+35 (66 hp)
  Initiative:            +6
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares), fly 90 ft. (good)
  Armor Class:           24 (+6 Dex, +8 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+9
  Attack:                Claw +13 melee (2d6+2) or wing +13 melee (2d8+2)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +13 melee (2d6+2) or 2 wings +13 melee (2d8+2)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Spell-like abilities, fear aura
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 10/evil or silver, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and petrification, lay on hands, low-light vision, resistance to cold 10 and sonic 10, speak with animals, spell resistance 25, true seeing
  Saves:                 Fort +10 (+14 against poison), Ref +11, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 15, Dex 23, Con 20, Int 15, Wis 16, Cha 16
  Skills:                Bluff +13, Concentration +15, Diplomacy +7, Disguise +3 (+5 acting), Handle Animal +13, Hide +16, Intimidate +5, Knowledge (any one) +12, Listen +13, Move Silently +16, Ride +8, Sense Motive +13, Spellcraft +12, Spot +21
  Feats:                 Empower Spell-Like Ability (*magic missile*), Flyby Attack, Weapon Finesse
  Environment:           A good-aligned plane.
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or squad (3--5)
  Challenge Rating:      9
  Treasure:              No coins; double goods; standard items
  Alignment:             Always neutral good
  Advancement:           8--14 HD (Medium); 15--21 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

An avoral's bones are strong but hollow, so even the largest specimens
weigh no more than 120 pounds. An avoral is about 7 feet tall. Each of
an avoral's wings has a small hand at the midpoint. When the wings are
folded, these appendages are about where human hands would be and can do
nearly anything hands can do.

An avoral's visual acuity is virtually unmatched: It can see detail on
objects up to 10 miles away and is said to be able to discern the color
of a creature's eyes at 200 paces.

Avorals speak Celestial, Infernal, and Draconic, but can speak with
almost any creature, thanks to their *tongues* ability.

### Combat {#avoral--combat}

On the ground, an avoral can lash out with its wings to deliver
punishing blows. However, it prefers to meet its foes in the air, where
it can employ its talons and make full use of its aerial speed and
agility. It can't make wing attacks while flying, however.

An avoral's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are
treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*aid, blur* (self only), *command*
(DC 14), *detect magic, dimension door, dispel magic, gust of wind* (DC
15), *hold person* (DC 16), *light, magic circle against evil* (self
only), *magic missile, see invisibility;* 3/day---*lightning bolt* (DC
16). Caster level 8th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Fear Aura (Su):** Once per day an avoral can create an aura of fear in
a 20-foot radius. It is otherwise identical with *fear* from an
8th-level caster (save DC 17). The save DC is Charisma-based.

**Lay on Hands (Su):** As the paladin class feature, except that each
day, an avoral can heal an amount of damage equal to its full normal hit
points.

**Speak with Animals (Su):** This ability works like *speak with
animals* (caster level 8th) but is a free action and does not require
sound.

**True Seeing (Su):** This ability is identical with *true seeing*
(caster level 14th), except that it has personal range and the avoral
must concentrate for 1 full round before it takes effect. Thereafter the
ability remains in effect as long as the avoral concentrates on it.

**Skills:** An avoral's sharp eyes give it a +8 racial bonus on Spot
checks.

## Azer

  ----------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                      Medium Outsider (Extraplanar, Fire)
  Hit Dice:                           2d8+2 (11 hp)
  Initiative:                         +1
  Speed:                              20 ft. in scale mail (4 squares); base speed 30 ft.
  Armor Class:                        23 (+1 Dex, +6 natural, +4 scale mail, +2 heavy
  shield), touch 11, flat-footed 22   
  Base Attack/Grapple:                +2/+3
  Attack:                             Warhammer +3 melee (1d8+1/x3 plus 1 fire) or shortspear +3 ranged (1d6+1 plus 1 fire)
  Full Attack:                        Warhammer +3 melee (1d8+1/x3 plus 1 fire) or shortspear +3 ranged (1d6+1 plus 1 fire)
  Space/Reach:                        5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:                    Heat
  Special Qualities:                  Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, spell resistance 13, vulnerability to cold
  Saves:                              Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +4
  Abilities:                          Str 13, Dex 13, Con 13, Int 12, Wis 12, Cha 9
  Skills:                             Appraise +6, Climb +0, Craft (any two) +6, Hide +0, Jump --6, Listen +6, Search +6, Spot +6
  Feats:                              Power Attack
  Environment:                        Elemental Plane of Fire
  Organization:                       Solitary, pair, team (3--4), squad (11--20 plus 2 3rd-level sergeants and 1 leader of 3rd--6th level), or clan (30--100 plus 50% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults, 5 5th-level lieutenants, and 3 7th-level captains)
  Challenge Rating:                   2
  Treasure:                           Standard coins; double goods (nonflammables only); standard items (nonflammables only)
  Alignment:                          Always lawful neutral
  Advancement:                        By character class
  Level Adjustment:                   +4
  ----------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Azers are dwarflike beings native to the Elemental Plane of Fire. They
wear kilts of brass, bronze, or copper, and speak Ignan and Common.

### Combat {#azer--combat}

Azers use broad-headed spears or well-crafted hammers in combat. When
unarmed, they attempt to grapple foes.

Although unfriendly and taciturn, azers rarely provoke a fight except to
relieve a foe of gems, which they love. If threatened, they fight to the
death, but they see the value of taking prisoners themselves.

**Heat (Ex):** An azer's body is intensely hot, so its unarmed attacks
deal extra fire damage. Its metallic weapons also conduct this heat.

### Azers as Characters

Azer characters possess the following racial traits.

--- +2 Strength, +2 Dexterity, +2 Constitution, +2 Intelligence, +2
Wisdom, --2 Charisma.

---Medium size.

---An azer's base land speed is 30 feet.

---Darkvision: Azers can see in the dark up to 60 feet.

---Racial Hit Dice: An azer begins with two levels of outsider, which
provide 2d8 Hit Dice, a base attack bonus of +2, and base saving throw
bonuses of Fort +3, Ref +3, and Will +3.

---Racial Skills: An azer's outsider levels give it skill points equal
to 5 x (8 + Int modifier). Its class skills are Appraise, Climb, Craft,
Hide, Jump, Listen, Search, and Spot.

---Racial Feats: An azer's outsider levels give it one feat.

--- +6 natural armor bonus.

---Special Attacks (see above): Heat.

---Special Qualities (see above): Immunity to fire, spell resistance
equal to 13 + class levels, vulnerability to cold.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Ignan. Bonus Languages: Abyssal, Aquan,
Auran, Celestial, Infernal, Terran.

---Favored Class: Fighter.

---Level adjustment +4.
