---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Monsters / Monsters (E-F)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MONSTERS (E-F)

## Table of Contents

-   [Eagle, Giant](#eagle-giant)
    -   [Combat](#eagle-giant--combat)
    -   [Training a Giant Eagle](#training-a-giant-eagle)
-   [Elemental](#elemental)
    -   [Combat](#elemental--combat)
    -   [Air Elemental](#air-elemental)
        -   [Combat](#air-elemental--combat)
    -   [Earth Elemental](#earth-elemental)
        -   [Combat](#earth-elemental--combat)
    -   [Fire Elemental](#fire-elemental)
        -   [Combat](#fire-elemental--combat)
    -   [Water Elemental](#water-elemental)
        -   [Combat](#water-elemental--combat)
-   [Elf](#elf)
    -   [Combat](#elf--combat)
    -   [Subraces](#subraces)
        -   [Half-Elf](#half-elf)
        -   [Aquatic Elf](#aquatic-elf)
        -   [Drow](#drow)
        -   [Gray Elf](#gray-elf)
        -   [Wild Elf](#wild-elf)
        -   [Wood Elf](#wood-elf)
-   [Ethereal Filcher](#ethereal-filcher)
    -   [Combat](#ethereal-filcher--combat)
-   [Ethereal Marauder](#ethereal-marauder)
    -   [Combat](#ethereal-marauder--combat)
-   [Ettercap](#ettercap)
    -   [Combat](#ettercap--combat)
-   [Ettin](#ettin)
    -   [Combat](#ettin--combat)
-   [Fiendish Creature](#fiendish-creature)
    -   [Creating a Fiendish Creature](#creating-a-fiendish-creature)
-   [Formian](#formian)
    -   [Combat](#formian--combat)
    -   [Worker](#worker)
        -   [Combat](#worker--combat)
    -   [Warrior](#warrior)
        -   [Combat](#warrior--combat)
    -   [Taskmaster](#taskmaster)
        -   [Combat](#taskmaster--combat)
    -   [Myrmarch](#myrmarch)
        -   [Combat](#myrmarch--combat)
    -   [Queen](#queen)
        -   [Combat](#queen--combat)
-   [Frost Worm](#frost-worm)
    -   [Combat](#frost-worm--combat)
-   [Fungus](#fungus)
    -   [Combat](#fungus--combat)
    -   [Shrieker](#shrieker)
        -   [Combat](#shrieker--combat)
    -   [Violet Fungus](#violet-fungus)
        -   [Combat](#violet-fungus--combat)

## Eagle, Giant

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Magical Beast
  Hit Dice:              4d10+4 (26 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 10 ft. (2 squares), fly 80 ft. (average)
  Armor Class:           15 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 12
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +4/+12
  Attack:                Claw +7 melee (1d6+4)
  Full Attack:           2 claws +7 melee (1d6+4) and bite +2 melee (1d8+2)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, evasion
  Saves:                 Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +3
  Abilities:             Str 18, Dex 17, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 10
  Skills:                Knowledge (nature) +2, Listen +6, Sense Motive +4, Spot +15, Survival +3
  Feats:                 Alertness, Flyby Attack
  Environment:           Temperate mountains
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or eyrie (5--12)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral good
  Advancement:           5--8 HD (Large); 9--12 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      +2 (cohort)
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------

A typical giant eagle stands about 10 feet tall, has a wingspan of up to
20 feet, and resembles its smaller cousins in nearly every way except
size. It weighs about 500 pounds.

Giant eagles speak Common and Auran.

### Combat {#eagle-giant--combat}

A giant eagle typically attacks from a great height, diving earthward at
tremendous speed. When it cannot dive, it uses its powerful talons and
slashing beak to strike at its target's head and eyes.

A solitary giant eagle is typically hunting or patrolling in the
vicinity of its nest and generally ignores creatures that do not appear
threatening. A mated pair attacks in concert, making repeated diving
attacks to drive away intruders, and fights to the death to defend their
nest or hatchlings.

**Evasion (Ex):** With a successful Reflex save against an attack that
allows a Reflex save for half damage, a giant eagle takes no damage.

**Skills:** Giant eagles have a +4 racial bonus on Spot checks.

### Training a Giant Eagle

Although intelligent, a giant eagle requires training before it can bear
a rider in combat. To be trained, a giant eagle must have a friendly
attitude toward the trainer (this can be achieved through a successful
Diplomacy check). Training a friendly giant eagle requires six weeks of
work and a DC 25 Handle Animal check.

Riding a giant eagle requires an exotic saddle. A giant eagle can fight
while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also attack unless he or
she succeeds on a Ride check.

Giant eagle eggs are worth 2,500 gp apiece on the open market, while
chicks are worth 4,000 gp each. Professional trainers charge 1,000 gp to
rear or train a giant eagle.

Carrying Capacity: A light load for a giant eagle is up to 300 pounds; a
medium load, 301--600 pounds; and a heavy load, 601--900 pounds.

## Elemental

Elementals are incarnations of the elements that compose existence.

### Combat {#elemental--combat}

Elementals have varied combat abilities and tactics, but all have the
same elemental qualities.

### Air Elemental

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Air Elemental, Small                                         Air Elemental, Medium                                             Air Elemental, Large
                         Small Elemental [(Air, Extraplanar)]{.small}                 Medium Elemental [(Air, Extraplanar)]{.small}                     Large Elemental [(Air, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              2d8 (9 hp)                                                   4d8+8 (26 hp)                                                     8d8+24 (60 hp)
  Initiative:            +7                                                           +9                                                                +11
  Speed:                 Fly 100 ft. (perfect) (20 squares)                           Fly 100 ft. (perfect) (20 squares)                                Fly 100 ft. (perfect) (20 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 14   18 (+5 Dex, +3 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 13                 20 (--1 size, +7 Dex, +4 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/--3                                                       +3/+4                                                             +6/+12
  Attack:                Slam +5 melee (1d4)                                          Slam +8 melee (1d6+1)                                             Slam +12 melee (2d6+2)
  Full Attack:           Slam +5 melee (1d4)                                          Slam +8 melee (1d6+1)                                             2 slams +12 melee (2d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                  5 ft./5 ft.                                                       10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Air mastery, whirlwind                                       Air mastery, whirlwind                                            Air mastery, whirlwind
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                          Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                               Damage reduction 5/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits
  Saves:                 Fort +0, Ref +6, Will +0                                     Fort +3, Ref +9, Will +1                                          Fort +5, Ref +13, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 17, Con 10, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11                Str 12, Dex 21, Con 14, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11                     Str 14, Dex 25, Con 16, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +2, Spot +3                                           Listen +3, Spot +4                                                Listen +5, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative^B^, Weapon Finesse ^B^     Dodge, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative ^B^, Weapon Finesse^B^   Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative^B^, Weapon Finesse^B^
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Air                                       Elemental Plane of Air                                            Elemental Plane of Air
  Organization:          Solitary                                                     Solitary                                                          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      1                                                            3                                                                 5
  Treasure:              None                                                         None                                                              None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                              Usually neutral                                                   Usually neutral
  Advancement:           3 HD (Small)                                                 5--7 HD (Medium)                                                  9--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                          ---                                                               ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Air Elemental, Huge                                                                                                    Air Elemental, Greater                                                                                                                                Air Elemental, Elder
                         Huge Elemental [(Air, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                            Huge Elemental [(Air, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                                                           Huge Elemental [(Air, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              16d8+64 (136 hp)                                                                                                       21d8+84 (178 hp)                                                                                                                                      24d8+96 (204 hp)
  Initiative:            +13                                                                                                                    +14                                                                                                                                                   +15
  Speed:                 Fly 100 ft. (perfect) (20 squares)                                                                                     Fly 100 ft. (perfect) (20 squares)                                                                                                                    Fly 100 ft. (perfect) (20 squares)
  Armor Class:           21 (--2 size, +9 Dex, +4 natural), touch 17, flat-footed 12                                                            26 (--2 size, +10 Dex, +8 natural), touch 18, flat-footed 16                                                                                          27 (--2 size, +11 Dex, +8 natural), touch 19, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+24                                                                                                                +15/+28                                                                                                                                               +18/+32
  Attack:                Slam +19 melee (2d8+4)                                                                                                 Slam +23 melee (2d8+5)                                                                                                                                Slam +27 melee (2d8+6)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +19 melee (2d8+4)                                                                                              2 slams +23 melee (2d8+5)                                                                                                                             2 slams +27 melee (2d8+6)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.                                                                                                          15 ft./15 ft.                                                                                                                                         15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Air mastery, whirlwind                                                                                                 Air mastery, whirlwind                                                                                                                                Air mastery, whirlwind
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                                                             Damage reduction 10/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                                                                                           Damage reduction 10/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +19, Will +5                                                                                              Fort +11, Ref +22, Will +9                                                                                                                            Fort +12, Ref +25, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 18, Dex 29, Con 18, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11                                                                          Str 20, Dex 31, Con 18, Int 8, Wis 11, Cha 11                                                                                                         Str 22, Dex 33, Con 18, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +11, Spot +12                                                                                                   Listen +14, Spot +14                                                                                                                                  Listen +29, Spot +29
  Feats:                 Alertness, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative ^B^, Mobility, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^   Alertness, Blind-fight, Combat Reflexes, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative ^B^, Iron Will, Mobility, Power Attack, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^   Alertness, Blind-fight, Cleave, Combat Reflexes, Flyby Attack, Improved Initiative ^B^, Iron Will, Mobility, Power Attack, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Air                                                                                                 Elemental Plane of Air                                                                                                                                Elemental Plane of Air
  Organization:          Solitary                                                                                                               Solitary                                                                                                                                              Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7                                                                                                                      9                                                                                                                                                     11
  Treasure:              None                                                                                                                   None                                                                                                                                                  None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                                                                                        Usually neutral                                                                                                                                       Usually neutral
  Advancement:           17--20 HD (Huge)                                                                                                       22--23 HD (Huge)                                                                                                                                      25--48 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                                                                    ---                                                                                                                                                   ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Air elementals speak Auran, though they rarely choose to do so.

#### Combat {#air-elemental--combat}

Their rapid speed makes air elementals useful on vast battlefields or in
extended aerial combat.

**Air Mastery (Ex):** Airborne creatures take a --1 penalty on attack
and damage rolls against an air elemental.

**Whirlwind (Su):** The elemental can transform itself into a whirlwind
once every 10 minutes and remain in that form for up to 1 round for
every 2 HD it has. In this form, the elemental can move through the air
or along a surface at its fly speed.

The whirlwind is 5 feet wide at the base, up to 30 feet wide at the top,
and up to 50 feet tall, depending on the elemental's size. The elemental
controls the exact height, but it must be at least 10 feet.

The elemental's movement while in whirlwind form does not provoke
attacks of opportunity, even if the elemental enters the space another
creature occupies. Another creature might be caught in the whirlwind if
it touches or enters the whirlwind, or if the elemental moves into or
through the creature's space.

Creatures one or more size categories smaller than the elemental might
take damage when caught in the whirlwind (see the table below for
details) and may be lifted into the air. An affected creature must
succeed on a Reflex save when it comes into contact with the whirlwind
or take the indicated damage. It must also succeed on a second Reflex
save or be picked up bodily and held suspended in the powerful winds,
automatically taking the indicated damage each round. A creature that
can fly is allowed a Reflex save each round to escape the whirlwind. The
creature still takes damage but can leave if the save is successful. The
DC for saves against the whirlwind's effects varies with the elemental's
size (see the table). The save DC is Strength based.

Creatures trapped in the whirlwind cannot move except to go where the
elemental carries them or to escape the whirlwind.

Creatures caught in the whirlwind can otherwise act normally, but must
succeed on a Concentration check (DC 15 + spell level) to cast a spell.
Creatures caught in the whirlwind take a --4 penalty to Dexterity and a
--2 penalty on attack rolls. The elemental can have only as many
creatures trapped inside the whirlwind at one time as will fit inside
the whirlwind's volume.

The elemental can eject any carried creatures whenever it wishes,
depositing them wherever the whirlwind happens to be. A summoned
elemental always ejects trapped creatures before returning to its home
plane.

If the whirlwind's base touches the ground, it creates a swirling cloud
of debris. This cloud is centered on the elemental and has a diameter
equal to half the whirlwind's height. The cloud obscures all vision,
including darkvision, beyond 5 feet. Creatures 5 feet away have
concealment, while those farther away have total concealment.

Those caught in the cloud must succeed on a Concentration check (DC 15 +
spell level) to cast a spell.

An elemental in whirlwind form cannot make slam attacks and does not
threaten the area around it.

  --------------------- -------- -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ------------
  Air Elemental Sizes                                                                                                                                                                    
                                          []{style="                                                                                                                                     
                                                          display: block;                                                                                                                
                                                          position: absolute;                                                                                                            
                                                          right: 0;                                                                                                                      
                                                          top: 50%;                                                                                                                      
                                                          left: 0px;                                                                                                                     
                                                          border-top: 1px solid currentColor;                                                                                            
                                                        "}[Whirlwind ]{style="background-color: #fff; display: inline-block; z-index: 1; position: relative; padding: 0 8px"}            
  Elemental             Height   Weight   Save DC                                                                                                                               Damage   Height
  Small                 4 ft.    1 lb.    11                                                                                                                                    1d4      10--20 ft.
  Medium                8 ft.    2 lb.    13                                                                                                                                    1d6      10--30 ft.
  Large                 16 ft.   4 lb.    16                                                                                                                                    2d6      10--40 ft.
  Huge                  32 ft.   8 lb.    22                                                                                                                                    2d8      10--50 ft.
  Greater               36 ft.   10 lb.   25                                                                                                                                    2d8      10--60 ft.
  Elder                 40 ft.   12 lb.   28                                                                                                                                    2d8      10--60 ft.
  --------------------- -------- -------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ------------

### Earth Elemental

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Earth Elemental, Small                                        Earth Elemental, Medium                             Earth Elemental, Large
                         Small Elemental [(Earth, Extraplanar)]{.small}                Medium Elemental [(Earth, Extraplanar)]{.small}     Large Elemental [(Earth, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              2d8+2 (11 hp)                                                 4d8+12 (30 hp)                                      8d8+32 (68 hp)
  Initiative:            --1                                                           --1                                                 --1
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares)                                            20 ft. (4 squares)                                  20 ft. (4 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (+1 size, --1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 17   18 (--1 Dex, +9 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18   18 (--1 size, --1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/+0                                                         +3/+8                                               +6/+17
  Attack:                Slam +5 melee (1d6+4)                                         Slam +8 melee (1d8+7)                               Slam +12 melee (2d8+7)
  Full Attack:           Slam +5 melee (1d6+4)                                         Slam +8 melee (1d8+7)                               2 slams +12 melee (2d8+7)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                   5 ft./5 ft.                                         10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Earth mastery, push                                           Earth mastery, push                                 Earth mastery, push
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., earth glide, elemental traits              Darkvision 60 ft., earth glide, elemental traits    Damage reduction 5/--, earth glide, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref --1, Will +0                                     Fort +7, Ref +0, Will +1                            Fort +10, Ref +1, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 17, Dex 8, Con 13, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11                  Str 21, Dex 8, Con 17, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11        Str 25, Dex 8, Con 19, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +3, Spot +2                                            Listen +4, Spot +3                                  Listen +6, Spot +5
  Feats:                 Power Attack                                                  Cleave, Power Attack                                Cleave, Great Cleave, Power Attack
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Earth                                      Elemental Plane of Earth                            Elemental Plane of Earth
  Organization:          Solitary                                                      Solitary                                            Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      1                                                             3                                                   5
  Treasure:              None                                                          None                                                None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                               Usually neutral                                     Usually neutral
  Advancement:           3 HD (Small)                                                  5--7 HD (Medium)                                    9--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                           ---                                                 ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Earth Elemental, Huge                                                             Earth Elemental, Greater                                                                                      Earth Elemental, Elder
                         Huge Elemental [(Earth, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                     Huge Elemental [(Earth, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                 Huge Elemental [(Earth, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              16d8+80 (152 hp)                                                                  21d8+105 (199 hp)                                                                                             24d8+120 (228 hp)
  Initiative:            --1                                                                               --1                                                                                                           --1
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares)                                                                30 ft. (6 squares)                                                                                            30 ft. (6 squares)
  Armor Class:           18 (--2 size, --1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 18                      20 (--2 size, --1 Dex, +13 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 20                                                  22 (--2 size, --1 Dex, +15 natural), touch 7, flat-footed 22
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+29                                                                           +15/+33                                                                                                       +18/+37
  Attack:                Slam +19 melee (2d10+9)                                                           Slam +23 melee (2d10+10)                                                                                      Slam +27 melee (2d10+11/19--20)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +19 melee (2d10+9)                                                        2 slams +23 melee (2d10+10) 2                                                                                 slams +27 melee (2d10+11/19--20)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.                                                                     15 ft./15 ft.                                                                                                 15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Earth mastery, push                                                               Earth mastery, push                                                                                           Earth mastery, push
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/--, earth glide, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits           Damage reduction 10/--, earth glide, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                                      Damage reduction 10/--, earth glide, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits
  Saves:                 Fort +15, Ref +4, Will +7                                                         Fort +17, Ref +6, Will +9                                                                                     Fort +19, Ref +7, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 29, Dex 8, Con 21, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11                                      Str 31, Dex 8, Con 21, Int 8, Wis 11, Cha 11                                                                  Str 33, Dex 8, Con 21, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +10, Spot +9                                                               Listen +14, Spot +14                                                                                          Listen +29, Spot +29
  Feats:                 Awesome Blow, Cleave, Great Cleave, Improved Bull Rush, Iron Will, Power Attack   Alertness, Awesome Blow, Cleave, Great Cleave, Improved Bull Rush, Improved Sunder, Iron Will, Power Attack   Alertness, Awesome Blow, Cleave, Great Cleave, Improved Bull Rush, Improved Critical (slam), Improved Sunder, Iron Will, Power Attack
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Earth                                                          Elemental Plane of Earth                                                                                      Elemental Plane of Earth
  Organization:          Solitary                                                                          Solitary                                                                                                      Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7                                                                                 9                                                                                                             11
  Treasure:              None                                                                              None                                                                                                          None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                                                   Usually neutral                                                                                               Usually neutral
  Advancement:           17--20 HD (Huge)                                                                  22--23 HD (Huge)                                                                                              25--48 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                               ---                                                                                                           ---
  ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When summoned to the Material Plane, an earth elemental consists of
whatever types of dirt, stones, precious metals, and gems it was
conjured from.

Earth elementals speak Terran but rarely choose to do so.

#### Combat {#earth-elemental--combat}

Though an earth elemental moves slowly, it is a relentless opponent. It
can travel though solid ground or stone as easily as humans walk on the
earth's surface. It cannot swim, however, and must either walk around a
body of water or go through the ground under it. An earth elemental can
move along the bottom of a body of water but prefers not to.

**Earth Mastery (Ex):** An earth elemental gains a +1 bonus on attack
and damage rolls if both it and its foe are touching the ground. If an
opponent is airborne or waterborne, the elemental takes a --4 penalty on
attack and damage rolls. (These modifiers are not included in the
statistics block.)

**Push (Ex):** An earth elemental can start a bull rush maneuver without
provoking an attack of opportunity. The combat modifiers given in Earth
Mastery, above, also apply to the elemental's opposed Strength checks.

**Earth Glide (Ex):** An earth elemental can glide through stone, dirt,
or almost any other sort of earth except metal as easily as a fish swims
through water. Its burrowing leaves behind no tunnel or hole, nor does
it create any ripple or other signs of its presence. A *move earth*
spell cast on an area containing a burrowing earth elemental flings the
elemental back 30 feet, stunning the creature for 1 round unless it
succeeds on a DC 15 Fortitude save.

  ----------------------- -------- ----------- ----------- -------- ------------
  Earth Elemental Sizes                                             
  Elemental               Height   Weight      Elemental   Height   Weight
  Small                   4 ft.    80 lb.      Huge        32 ft.   48,000 lb.
  Medium                  8 ft.    750 lb.     Greater     36 ft.   54,000 lb.
  Large                   16 ft.   6,000 lb.   Elder       40 ft.   60,000 lb.
  ----------------------- -------- ----------- ----------- -------- ------------

### Fire Elemental

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Fire Elemental, Small                                                          Fire Elemental, Medium                                                         Fire Elemental, Large
                         Small Elemental [(Fire, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                  Medium Elemental [(Fire, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                 Large Elemental [(Fire, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              2d8 (9 hp)                                                                     4d8+8 (26 hp)                                                                  8d8+24 (60 hp)
  Initiative:            +5                                                                             +7                                                                             +9
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares)                                                            50 ft. (10 squares)                                                            50 ft. (10 squares)
  Armor Class:           15 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14                     16 (+3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 13                              18 (--1 size, +5 Dex, +4 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/--3                                                                         +3/+4                                                                          +6/+12
  Attack:                Slam +3 melee (1d4 plus 1d4 fire)                                              Slam +6 melee (1d6+1 plus 1d6 fire)                                            Slam +10 melee (2d6+2 plus 2d6 fire)
  Full Attack:           Slam +3 melee (1d4 plus 1d4 fire)                                              Slam +6 melee (1d6+1 plus 1d6 fire)                                            2 slams +10 melee (2d6+2 plus 2d6 fire)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                                    5 ft./5 ft.                                                                    10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Burn                                                                           Burn                                                                           Burn
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold   Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold   Damage reduction 5/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold
  Saves:                 Fort +0, Ref +4, Will +0                                                       Fort +3, Ref +7, Will +1                                                       Fort +5, Ref +11, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 13, Con 10, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11                                  Str 12, Dex 17, Con 14, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11                                  Str 14, Dex 21, Con 16, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +2, Spot +3                                                             Listen +3, Spot +4                                                             Listen +5, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Dodge, Improved Initiative^B^, Weapon Finesse^B^                               Dodge, Improved Initiative^B^, Mobility, Weapon Finesse^B^                     Dodge, Improved Initiative ^B^,Mobility, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Fire                                                        Elemental Plane of Fire                                                        Elemental Plane of Fire
  Organization:          Solitary                                                                       Solitary                                                                       Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      1                                                                              3                                                                              5
  Treasure:              None                                                                           None                                                                           None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                                                Usually neutral                                                                Usually neutral
  Advancement:           3 HD (Small)                                                                   5--7 HD (Medium)                                                               9--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                            ---                                                                            ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Fire Elemental, Huge                                                                                                Fire Elemental, Greater                                                                                                                               Fire Elemental, Elder
                         Huge Elemental [(Fire, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                        Huge Elemental [(Fire, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                                                          Huge Elemental [(Fire, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              16d8+64 (136 hp)                                                                                                    21d8+84 (178 hp)                                                                                                                                      24d8+96 (204 hp)
  Initiative:            +11                                                                                                                 +12                                                                                                                                                   +13
  Speed:                 60 ft. (12 squares)                                                                                                 60 ft. (12 squares)                                                                                                                                   60 ft. (12 squares)
  Armor Class:           19 (--2 size, +7 Dex, +4 natural), touch 15, flat-footed 12                                                         24 (--2 size, +8 Dex, +8 natural), touch 16, flat-footed 16                                                                                           25 (--2 size, +9 Dex, +8 natural), touch 17, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+24                                                                                                             +15/+28                                                                                                                                               +18/+32
  Attack:                Slam +17 melee (2d8+4 plus 2d8 fire)                                                                                Slam +22 melee (2d8+5 plus 2d8 fire)                                                                                                                  Slam +26 melee (2d8+6 plus 2d8 fire)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +17 melee (2d8+4 plus 2d8 fire)                                                                             2 slams +22 melee (2d8+5 plus 2d8 fire)                                                                                                               2 slams +26 melee (2d8+6 plus 2d8 fire)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.                                                                                                       15 ft./15 ft.                                                                                                                                         15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Burn                                                                                                                Burn                                                                                                                                                  Burn
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold                 Damage reduction 10/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold                                                  Damage reduction 10/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, immunity to fire, vulnerability to cold
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +17, Will +7                                                                                           Fort +11, Ref +20, Will +9                                                                                                                            Fort +14, Ref +23, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 18, Dex 25, Con 18, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11                                                                       Str 20, Dex 27, Con 18, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11                                                                                                         Str 22, Dex 29, Con 18, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +11, Spot +12                                                                                                Listen +14, Spot +14                                                                                                                                  Listen +28, Spot +29
  Feats:                 Alertness, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Improved Initiative ^B^, Iron Will, Mobility, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^   Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Improved Initiative ^B^, Iron Will, Mobility, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^, Weapon Focus (slam)   Alertness, Blind-Fight, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Improved Initiative ^B^, Great Fortitude, Iron Will, Mobility, Spring Attack, Weapon Finesse^B^, Weapon Focus (slam)
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Fire                                                                                             Elemental Plane of Fire                                                                                                                               Elemental Plane of Fire
  Organization:          Solitary                                                                                                            Solitary                                                                                                                                              Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7                                                                                                                   9                                                                                                                                                     11
  Treasure:              None                                                                                                                None                                                                                                                                                  None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                                                                                     Usually neutral                                                                                                                                       Usually neutral
  Advancement:           17--20 HD (Huge)                                                                                                    22--23 HD (Huge)                                                                                                                                      25--48 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                                                                 ---                                                                                                                                                   ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A fire elemental cannot enter water or any other nonflammable liquid. A
body of water is an impassible barrier unless the fire elemental can
step or jump over it.

Fire elementals speak Ignan, though they rarely choose to do so.

#### Combat {#fire-elemental--combat}

A fire elemental is a fierce opponent that attacks its enemies directly
and savagely. It takes joy in burning the creatures and objects of the
Material Plane to ashes.

**Burn (Ex):** A fire elemental's slam attack deals bludgeoning damage
plus fire damage from the elemental's flaming body. Those hit by a fire
elemental's slam attack also must succeed on a Reflex save or catch on
fire. The flame burns for 1d4 rounds. The save DC varies with the
elemental's size (see the table below). A burning creature can take a
move action to put out the flame. The save DC is Constitution- based.

Creatures hitting a fire elemental with natural weapons or unarmed
attacks take fire damage as though hit by the elemental's attack, and
also catch on fire unless they succeed on a Reflex save.

  ---------------------- -------- -------- --------------
  Fire Elemental Sizes                     
  Elemental              Height   Weight   Burn Save DC
  Small                  4 ft.    1 lb.    11
  Medium                 8 ft.    2 lb.    14
  Large                  16 ft.   4 lb.    17
  Huge                   32 ft.   8 lb.    22
  Greater                36 ft.   10 lb.   24
  Elder                  40 ft.   12 lb.   26
  ---------------------- -------- -------- --------------

### Water Elemental

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------
                         Water Elemental, Small                               Water Elemental, Medium                             Water Elemental, Large
                         Small Elemental [(Water, Extraplanar)]{.small}       Medium Elemental [(Water, Extraplanar)]{.small}     Large Elemental [(Water, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              2d8+2 (11 hp)                                        4d8+12 (30 hp)                                      8d8+32 (68 hp)
  Initiative:            +0                                                   +1                                                  +2
  Speed:                 20 ft. (4 squares), swim 90 ft.                      20 ft. (4 squares), swim 90 ft.                     20 ft. (4 squares), swim 90 ft.
  Armor Class:           17 (+1 size, +6 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 17   19 (+1 Dex, +8 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 18   20 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +9 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/--1                                               +3/+6                                               +6/+15
  Attack:                Slam +4 melee (1d6+3)                                Slam +6 melee (1d8+4)                               Slam +10 melee (2d8+5)
  Full Attack:           Slam +4 melee (1d6+3)                                Slam +6 melee (1d8+4)                               2 slams +10 melee (2d8+5)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                          5 ft./5 ft.                                         10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Water mastery, drench, vortex                        Water mastery, drench, vortex                       Water mastery, drench, vortex
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                  Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                 Damage reduction 5/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +0, Will +0                             Fort +7, Ref +2, Will +1                            Fort +10, Ref +4, Will +2
  Abilities:             Str 14, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11        Str 16, Dex 12, Con 17, Int 4, Wis 11, Cha 11       Str 20, Dex 14, Con 19, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +2, Spot +3                                   Listen +3, Spot +4                                  Listen +5, Spot +6
  Feats:                 Power Attack                                         Cleave, Power Attack                                Cleave, Great Cleave, Power Attack
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Water                             Elemental Plane of Water                            Elemental Plane of Water
  Organization:          Solitary                                             Solitary                                            Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      1                                                    3                                                   5
  Treasure:              None                                                 None                                                None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                      Usually neutral                                     Usually neutral
  Advancement:           3 HD (Small)                                         5--7 HD (Medium)                                    9--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                  ---                                                 ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Water Elemental, Huge                                                          Water Elemental, Greater                                                                                            Water Elemental, Elder
                         Huge Elemental [(Water, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                  Huge Elemental [(Water, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                       Huge Elemental [(Water, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              16d8+80 (152 hp)                                                               21d8+105 (199 hp)                                                                                                   24d8+120 (228 hp)
  Initiative:            +4                                                                             +5                                                                                                                  +6
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), swim 120 ft.                                               30 ft. (6 squares), swim 120 ft.                                                                                    30 ft. (6 squares), swim 120 ft.
  Armor Class:           21 (--2 size, +4 Dex, +9 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 17                    22 (--2 size, +5 Dex, +9 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 17                                                         23 (--2 size, +6 Dex, +9 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 17
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+27                                                                        +15/+31                                                                                                             +18/+35
  Attack:                Slam +17 melee (2d10+7)                                                        Slam +21 melee (2d10+8)                                                                                             Slam +25 melee (2d10+9/19--20)
  Full Attack:           2 slams +17 melee (2d10+7)                                                     2 slams +21 melee (2d10+8)                                                                                          2 slams +25 melee (2d10+9/19--20)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./15 ft.                                                                  15 ft./15 ft.                                                                                                       15 ft./15 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Water mastery, drench, vortex                                                  Water mastery, drench, vortex                                                                                       Water mastery, drench, vortex
  Special Qualities:     Damage reduction 5/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                     Damage reduction 10/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits                                                         Damage reduction 10/--, darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits
  Saves:                 Fort +15, Ref +9, Will +7                                                      Fort +17, Ref +14, Will +9                                                                                          Fort +19, Ref +16, Will +10
  Abilities:             Str 24, Dex 18, Con 21, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 11                                  Str 26, Dex 20, Con 21, Int 8, Wis 11, Cha 11                                                                       Str 28, Dex 22, Con 21, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +11, Spot +12                                                           Listen +14, Spot +14                                                                                                Listen +29, Spot +29
  Feats:                 Alertness, Cleave, Great Cleave, Power Attack, Improved Bull Rush, Iron Will   Alertness, Cleave, Great Cleave, Improved Bull Rush, Improved Sunder, Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes, Power Attack   Alertness, Cleave, Great Cleave, Improved Critical (slam), Improved Bull Rush, Improved Sunder, Iron Will, Lightning Reflexes, Power Attack
  Environment:           Elemental Plane of Water                                                       Elemental Plane of Water                                                                                            Elemental Plane of Water
  Organization:          Solitary                                                                       Solitary                                                                                                            Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      7                                                                              9                                                                                                                   11
  Treasure:              None                                                                           None                                                                                                                None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral                                                                Usually neutral                                                                                                     Usually neutral
  Advancement:           17--20 HD (Huge)                                                               22--23 HD (Huge)                                                                                                    25--48 HD (Huge)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                            ---                                                                                                                 ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A water elemental can't venture more than 180 feet from the body of
water from which it was conjured.

Water elementals speak Aquan but rarely choose to do so.

#### Combat {#water-elemental--combat}

A water elemental prefers to fight in a large body of water where it can
disappear beneath the waves and suddenly swell up behind its opponents.

**Water Mastery (Ex):** A water elemental gains a +1 bonus on attack and
damage rolls if both it and its opponent are touching water. If the
opponent or the elemental is touching the ground, the elemental takes a
--4 penalty on attack and damage rolls. (These modifiers are not
included in the statistics block.)

A water elemental can be a serious threat to a ship that crosses its
path. An elemental can easily overturn small craft (5 feet of length per
Hit Die of the elemental) and stop larger vessels (10 feet long per HD).
Even large ships (20 feet long per HD) can be slowed to half speed.

**Drench (Ex):** The elemental's touch puts out torches, campfires,
exposed lanterns, and other open flames of nonmagical origin if these
are of Large size or smaller. The creature can dispel magical fire it
touches as *dispel magic* (caster level equals elemental's HD).

**Vortex (Su):** The elemental can transform itself into a whirlpool
once every 10 minutes, provided it is underwater, and remain in that
form for up to 1 round for every 2 HD it has. In vortex form, the
elemental can move through the water or along the bottom at its swim
speed. The vortex is 5 feet wide at the base, up to 30 feet wide at the
top, and 10 feet or more tall, depending on the elemental's size. The
elemental controls the exact height, but it must be at least 10 feet.

The elemental's movement while in vortex form does not provoke attacks
of opportunity, even if the elemental enters the space another creature
occupies. Another creature might be caught in the vortex if it touches
or enters the vortex, or if the elemental moves into or through the
creature's space.

Creatures one or more size categories smaller than the elemental might
take damage when caught in the vortex (see the table below for details)
and may be swept up by it. An affected creature must succeed on a Reflex
save when it comes into contact with the vortex or take the indicated
damage. It must also succeed on a second Reflex save or be picked up
bodily and held suspended in the powerful currents, automatically taking
damage each round. An affected creature is allowed a Reflex save each
round to escape the vortex. The creature still takes damage, but can
leave if the save is successful. The DC for saves against the vortex's
effects varies with the elemental's size. The save DC is Strength-based.

Creatures trapped in the vortex cannot move except to go where the
elemental carries them or to escape the whirlwind. Creatures caught in
the whirlwind can otherwise act normally, but must make a Concentration
check (DC 10 + spell level) to cast a spell. Creatures caught in the
whirlwind take a --4 penalty to Dexterity and a --2 penalty on attack
rolls. The elemental can have only as many creatures trapped inside the
vortex at one time as will fit inside the vortex's volume.

The elemental can eject any carried creatures whenever it wishes,
depositing them wherever the vortex happens to be. A summoned elemental
always ejects trapped creatures before returning to its home plane.

If the vortex's base touches the bottom, it creates a swirling cloud of
debris. This cloud is centered on the elemental and has a diameter equal
to half the vortex's height. The cloud obscures all vision, including
darkvision, beyond 5 feet. Creatures 5 feet away have concealment, while
those farther away have total concealment.

Those caught in the cloud must make a Concentration check (DC 15 + spell
level) to cast a spell.

An elemental in vortex form cannot make slam attacks and does not
threaten the area around it.

Skills: A water elemental has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to
perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to
take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use
the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line.

  ----------------------- -------- ------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ------------
  Water Elemental Sizes                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                []{style="                                                                                                                                  
                                                                display: block;                                                                                                             
                                                                position: absolute;                                                                                                         
                                                                right: 0;                                                                                                                   
                                                                top: 50%;                                                                                                                   
                                                                left: 0px;                                                                                                                  
                                                                border-top: 1px solid currentColor;                                                                                         
                                                              "}[Vortex ]{style="background-color: #fff; display: inline-block; z-index: 1; position: relative; padding: 0 8px"}            
  Elemental               Height   Weight       Save DC                                                                                                                            Damage   Height
  Small                   4 ft.    34 lb.       13                                                                                                                                 1d4      10--20 ft.
  Medium                  8 ft.    280 lb.      15                                                                                                                                 1d6      10--30 ft.
  Large                   16 ft.   2,250 lb.    19                                                                                                                                 2d6      10--40 ft.
  Huge                    32 ft.   18,000 lb.   25                                                                                                                                 2d8      10--50 ft.
  Greater                 36 ft.   21,000 lb.   28                                                                                                                                 2d8      10--60 ft.
  Elder                   40 ft.   24,000 lb.   31                                                                                                                                 2d8      10--60 ft.
  ----------------------- -------- ------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ------------

## Elf

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Elf, 1st-Level        | Drow, 1st-Level       |
|                       | Warrior               | Warrior               |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Medium Humanoid (Elf  | Medium Humanoid (Elf  |
|                       | )                     | )                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Hit Dice:             | 1d8 (4 hp)            | 1d8 (4 hp)            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Initiative:           | +1                    | +1                    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Speed:                | 30 ft. (6 squares)    | 30 ft. (6 squares)    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Armor Class:          | 15 (+1 Dex, +3        | 16 (+1 Dex, +4 chain  |
|                       | studded leather, +1   | shirt, +1 light       |
|                       | light shield), touch  | shield) touch 11,     |
|                       | 11, flat-footed 14    | flat-footed 15        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Base Attack/Grapple:  | +1/+2                 | +1/+2                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Attack:               | Longsword +2 melee    | Rapier +3 melee       |
|                       | (1d8+1/19--20) or     | (1d6+1/18--20) or     |
|                       | longbow +3 ranged     | hand crossbow +2      |
|                       | (1d8/x3)              | ranged (1d4/19--20)   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Full Attack:          | Longsword +2          | Rapier +3 melee       |
|                       | melee(1d8+1/19--20)   | (1d6+1/18--20) or     |
|                       | or longbow +3 ranged  | hand crossbow +2      |
|                       | (1d8/x3)              | ranged (1d4/19--20)   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Space/Reach:          | 5 ft./5 ft.           | 5 ft./5 ft.           |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Special Attacks:      | None                  | Poison, spell-like    |
|                       |                       | abilities             |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Special Qualities:    | Elven traits          | Drow traits, spell    |
|                       |                       | resistance 12         |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Saves:                | Fort +2, Ref +1, Will | Fort +2, Ref +1, Will |
|                       | --1\*                 | --1\*                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Abilities:            | Str 13, Dex 13, Con   | Str 13, Dex 13, Con   |
|                       | 10, Int 10, Wis 9,    | 10, Int 12, Wis 9,    |
|                       | Cha 8                 | Cha 10                |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Skills:               | Hide +1, Listen +2,   | Hide +0, Listen +2,   |
|                       | Search +3, Spot +2    | Search +4, Spot +3    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Feats:                | Weapon Focus          | Weapon Focus (rapier) |
|                       | (longbow)             |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Environment:          | <div>                 | Underground           |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Temperate forest      |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Half-elf: Temperate  |                       |
|                       | forests)              |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Aquatic: Temperate   |                       |
|                       | aquatic)              |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Gray: Temperate      |                       |
|                       | mountains)            |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Wild: Warm forests)  |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Wood: Temperate      |                       |
|                       | forests)              |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Organization:         | Squad (2--4), company | Squad (2--4), patrol  |
|                       | (11--20 plus 2        | (5--8 plus 2          |
|                       | 3rd-level sergeants   | 2nd-level sergeants   |
|                       | and 1 leader of       | and 1 leader of       |
|                       | 3rd--6th level), or   | 3rd--6th level), or   |
|                       | band (30--100 plus    | band (20--50 plus 10% |
|                       | 20% noncombatants     | noncombatants plus 1  |
|                       | plus 1 3rd-level      | 2nd-level sergeant    |
|                       | sergeant per 10       | per 5 adults, 2d4     |
|                       | adults, 5 5th-level   | 6th-level             |
|                       | lieutenants, and 3    | lieutenants, and 1d4  |
|                       | 7th-level captains)   | 9th-level captains)   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Challenge Rating:     | 1/2                   | 1 (see text)          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Treasure:             | Standard              | Standard              |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Alignment:            | <div>                 | Usually neutral evil  |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Usually chaotic good  |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | <div>                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (Wood: Usually        |                       |
|                       | neutral)              |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | </div>                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Advancement:          | By character class    | By character class    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Level Adjustment:     | +0                    | +2                    |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Elves average 5 feet tall and typically weigh just over 100 pounds. They
live on fruits and grains, though they occasionally hunt for fresh meat.
Elves prefer colorful clothes, usually with a green-and-gray cloak that
blends well with the colors of the forest.

Elves speak Elven, and most also know Common and Sylvan.

Most elves encountered outside their homes are warriors; the information
presented here is for one of 1st level.

### Combat {#elf--combat}

Elves are cautious warriors and take time to analyze their opponents and
the location of the fight if at all possible, maximizing their advantage
by using ambushes, snipers, and camouflage. They prefer to fire from
cover and retreat before they are found, repeating this maneuver until
all of their enemies are dead.

They prefer longbows, shortbows, rapiers, and longswords. In melee,
elves are graceful and deadly, using complex maneuvers that are
beautiful to observe. Their wizards often use *sleep* spells during
combat because these won't affect other elves.

**Elf Traits (Ex):** Elves possess the following racial traits.

--- +2 Dexterity, --2 Constitution.

---Medium size.

---An elf 's base land speed is 30 feet.

---Immunity to *sleep* spells and effects, and a +2 racial saving throw
bonus against enchantment spells or effects.

(Not reflected in the saving throw modifiers given here.)

---Low-light vision.

---Weapon Proficiency: Elves are automatically proficient with the
longsword, rapier, longbow, composite longbow, shortbow, and composite
shortbow.

--- +2 racial bonus on Listen, Search, and Spot checks. An elf who
merely passes within 5 feet of a secret or concealed door is entitled to
a Search check to notice it as if she were actively looking for it.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Elven. Bonus Languages: Draconic, Gnoll,
Gnome, Goblin, Orc, Sylvan.

---Favored Class: Wizard.

The elf warrior presented here had the following ability scores before
racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8.

### Subraces

The above information describes the high elf, the most common variety.
There are five other major subraces of elf, in addition to half-elves,
who share enough elven characteristics to be included here.

#### Half-Elf

Half-elves are not truly an elf subrace, but they are often mistaken for
elves. Half-elves usually inherit a good blend of their parents'
physical characteristics.

**Half-Elf Traits (Ex):** Half-elves possess the following racial
traits.

---Medium size.

---A half-elf 's base land speed is 30 feet.

---Immunity to *sleep* spells and similar magical effects, and a +2
racial bonus on saving throws against enchantment spells or effects.

---Low-light vision.

--- +1 racial bonus on Listen, Search, and Spot checks. A half-elf does
not have the elf 's ability to notice secret doors simply by passing
near them.

--- +2 racial bonus on Diplomacy and Gather Information checks:
Half-elves get along naturally with all people. This bonus may not apply
in situations or settings where half-elves are viewed with distrust.

---Elven Blood: For all effects related to race, a half-elf is
considered an elf. Half-elves, for example, are just as vulnerable to
special effects that affect elves as their elf ancestors are, and they
can use magic items that are only usable by elves.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Elven. Bonus Languages: Any (other than
secret languages, such as Druidic).

---Favored Class: Any. When determining whether a multiclass half-elf
takes an experience point penalty for multiclassing, her highest-level
class does not count.

#### Aquatic Elf

Also called sea elves, these creatures are waterbreathing cousins to
land-dwelling elves.

Aquatic elves fight underwater with tridents, spears, and nets.

**Aquatic Elf Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the high
elf traits, except where noted.

--- +2 Dexterity, --2 Intelligence. These adjustments replace the high
elf 's ability score adjustments.

---An aquatic elf has the aquatic subtype.

---An aquatic elf has a swim speed of 40 feet.

---Gills: Aquatic elves can survive out of the water for 1 hour per
point of Constitution (after that, refer to the suffocation rules).

---Superior Low-Light Vision: Aquatic elves can see four times as far as
a human in starlight, moonlight, torchlight, and similar conditions of
low illumination. This trait replaces the high elf 's low-light vision.

---Favored Class: Fighter. This trait replaces the high elf 's favored
class.

#### Drow

Also known as dark elves, drow are a depraved and evil subterranean
offshoot.

White is the most common hair color among drow, but almost any pale
shade is possible. Drow tend to be smaller and thinner than other sorts
of elves, and their eyes are often a vivid red.

Drow usually coat their arrows with a potent venom.

**Poison (Ex):** An opponent hit by a drow's poisoned weapon must
succeed on a DC 13 Fortitude save or fall unconscious. After 1 minute,
the subject must succeed on another DC 13 Fortitude save or remain
unconscious for 2d4 hours. A typical drow carries 1d4--1 doses of drow
knockout poison. Drow typically coat arrows and crossbow bolts with this
poison, but it can also be applied to a melee weapon. Note that drow
have no special ability to apply poison without risking being poisoned
themselves. Since this poison is not a magical effect, drow and other
elves are susceptible to it.

**Drow Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the high elf
traits, except where noted.

--- +2 Intelligence, +2 Charisma.

---Darkvision out to 120 feet. This trait replaces the high elf 's
low-light vision.

---Spell resistance equal to 11 + class levels.

--- +2 racial bonus on Will saves against spells and spell-like
abilities.

---Spell-Like Abilities: Drow can use the following spell-like abilities
once per day: *dancing lights, darkness, faerie fire.* Caster level
equals the drow's class levels.

---Weapon Proficiency: A drow is automatically proficient with the hand
crossbow, the rapier, and the short sword. This trait replaces the high
elf 's weapon proficiency.

---Automatic Languages: Common, Elven, Undercommon. Bonus Languages:
Abyssal, Aquan, Draconic, Drow Sign Language, Gnome, Goblin. This trait
replaces the high elf 's automatic and bonus languages.

---Light Blindness: Abrupt exposure to bright light (such as sunlight or
a *daylight* spell) blinds drow for 1 round. On subsequent rounds, they
are dazzled as long as they remain in the affected area.

---Favored Class: Wizard (male) or cleric (female). This trait replaces
the high elf 's favored class.

---Level adjustment +2.

The drow warrior presented here had the following ability scores before
racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8.

Challenge Rating: Drow with levels in NPC classes have a CR equal to
their character level. Drow with levels in PC classes have a CR equal to
their character level +1.

#### Gray Elf

Taller and grander in physical appearance than others of their race,
gray elves have a reputation for being aloof and arrogant (even by elven
standards). They have either silver hair and amber eyes or pale golden
hair and violet eyes. They prefer clothing of white, silver, yellow, or
gold, with cloaks of deep blue or purple.

**Gray Elf Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the high elf
traits.

--- +2 Intelligence, --2 Strength.

#### Wild Elf

Wild elvesare barbaric and tribal. Wild elves' hair color ranges from
black to light brown, lightening to silvery white with age. They dress
in simple clothing of animal skins and basic plant weaves.

**Wild Elf Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the high elf
traits, except where noted.

--- +2 Dexterity, --2 Intelligence. These adjustments replace the high
elf 's ability score adjustments.

---Favored Class: Sorcerer. This trait replaces the high elf 's favored
class.

#### Wood Elf

Their hair color ranges from yellow to a coppery red, and they are more
muscular than other elves. Their clothing is in dark shades of green and
earth tones to better blend in with their natural surroundings.

**Wood Elf Traits (Ex):** These traits are in addition to the high elf
traits, except where noted.

--- +2 Strength, --2 Intelligence.

---Favored Class: Ranger. This trait replaces the high elf 's favored
class.

## Ethereal Filcher

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Aberration
  Hit Dice:              5d8 (22 hp)
  Initiative:            +8
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (+4 Dex, +3 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+3
  Attack:                Bite +3 melee (1d4)
  Full Attack:           Bite +3 melee (1d4)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., detect magic, ethereal jaunt
  Saves:                 Fort +1, Ref +5, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 10, Dex 18, Con 11, Int 7, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Listen +9, Sleight of Hand +12, Spot +9
  Feats:                 Dodge, Improved Initiative
  Environment:           Underground
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              No coins; standard goods; double items
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           6--7 HD (Medium); 8--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

Ethereal filchers are bizarre-looking creatures with a penchant for
snatching trinkets from passersby. Their ability to move quickly between
the Ethereal Plane and the Material Plane makes them spectacular
pickpockets.

Ethereal filchers do not speak.

### Combat {#ethereal-filcher--combat}

An ethereal filcher prowls about, using its ethereal jaunt ability to
move about unseen (and often through solid objects). Upon locating a
likely mark, it shifts to the Material Plane, attempting to catch its
victim unaware. The creature attempts to seize an item, then retreats
quickly back to the Ethereal Plane. It is not above delivering a bite to
distract its target. Once it secures a trinket, it scurries back to its
lair to admire its prize. When badly wounded, a filcher escapes rather
than continuing the fight.

Any number of simple ruses can blunt a filcher's attack.

**Detect Magic (Su):** Ethereal filchers can detect magic as the spell
(caster level 5th) at will.

**Ethereal Jaunt (Su):** An ethereal filcher can shift from the Ethereal
Plane to the Material Plane as part of any move action, and shift back
again as a free action. It can remain on the Ethereal Plane for 1 round
before returning to the Material Plane. The ability is otherwise
identical with the *ethereal jaunt* spell (caster level 15th).

**Skills:** Ethereal filchers have a +8 racial bonus on Sleight of Hand
checks, and a +4 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks.

## Ethereal Marauder

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Magical Beast (Extraplanar)
  Hit Dice:              2d10 (11 hp)
  Initiative:            +5
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           14 (+1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +2/+4
  Attack:                Bite +4 melee (1d6+3)
  Full Attack:           Bite +4 melee (1d6+3)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:---    
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., ethereal jaunt
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +1
  Abilities:             Str 14, Dex 12, Con 11, Int 7, Wis 12, Cha 10
  Skills:                Listen +5, Move Silently +5, Spot +4
  Feats:                 Improved Initiative
  Environment:           Ethereal Plane
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral
  Advancement:           3--4 HD (Medium); 5--6 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

Ethereal marauders live and hunt on the Ethereal Plane. Ethereal
marauders' coloration ranges from bright blue to deep violet. An
ethereal marauder stands about 4 feet tall, but its overall length is
about 7 feet. It weighs about 200 pounds.

Ethereal marauders speak no known languages. Survivors of their attacks
on the Material Plane claim that they emit an eerie, high whine that
varies in pitch depending on the creature's speed and health.

### Combat {#ethereal-marauder--combat}

Once a marauder locates prey, it shifts to the Material Plane to attack,
attempting to catch its victim flat-footed. The creature bites its
victim, then retreats quickly back to the Ethereal Plane. When badly
hurt or wounded, a marauder escapes to its home plane rather than
continuing the fight.

**Ethereal Jaunt (Su):** An ethereal marauder can shift from the
Ethereal Plane to the Material Plane as a free action, and shift back
again as a move action. The ability is otherwise identical with the
*ethereal jaunt* spell (caster level 15th).

**Skills:** Ethereal marauders have a +2 racial bonus on Listen, Move
Silently, and Spot checks.

## Ettercap

  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Medium Aberration
  Hit Dice:              5d8+5 (27 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), climb 30 ft.
  Armor Class:           14 (+3 Dex, +1 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 11
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +3/+5
  Attack:                Bite +5 melee (1d8+2 plus poison)
  Attack:                Bite +5 melee (1d8+2 plus poison) and 2 claws +3 melee (1d3+1)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison, web
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref +4, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 14, Dex 17, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 15, Cha 8
  Skills:                Climb +10, Craft (trapmaking) +4, Hide +9, Listen +4, Spot +8
  Feats:                 Great Fortitude, Multiattack
  Environment:           Warm forests
  Organization:          Solitary, pair, or troupe (1--2 plus 2--4 Medium monstrous spiders)
  Challenge Rating:      3
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually neutral evil
  Advancement:           6--7 HD (Medium); 8--15 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      +4
  ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

An ettercap is about 6 feet tall and weighs about 200 pounds.

Ettercaps speak Common.

### Combat {#ettercap--combat}

Ettercaps are not brave creatures, but their cunning traps often ensure
that the enemy never draws a weapon. When an ettercap does engage its
enemies, it attacks with its keen-edged claws and venomous bite. It
usually will not come within melee reach of any foe that is still able
to move.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 15, initial damage 1d6 Dex,
secondary damage 2d6 Dex. The save DC is Constitution based and includes
a +2 racial bonus.

**Web (Ex):** An ettercap can throw a web eight times per day. This is
similar to an attack with a net but has a maximum range of 50 feet, with
a range increment of 10 feet, and is effective against targets of up to
Medium size. The web anchors the target in place, allowing no movement.

An entangled creature can escape with a DC 13 Escape Artist check or
burst the web with a DC 17 Strength check. The check DCs are
Constitution-based, and the Strength check DC includes a +4 racial
bonus. The web has 6 hit points, hardness 0, and takes double damage
from fire.

Ettercaps can also create sheets of sticky webbing from 5 to 60 feet
square. They usually position these to snare flying creatures but can
also try to trap prey on the ground. Approaching creatures must succeed
on a DC 20 Spot check to notice a web, or they stumble into it and
become trapped as though by a successful web attack. Attempts to escape
or burst the webbing receive a +5 bonus if the trapped creature has
something to walk on or grab while pulling free. Each 5-foot-square
section has 6 hit points, hardness 0, and takes double damage from fire.

An ettercap can move across its own sheet web at its climb speed and can
determine the exact location of any creature touching the web.

**Skills:** Ettercaps have a +4 racial bonus on Craft (trapmaking),
Hide, and Spot checks. They have a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and
can always choose to take 10 on Climb checks, even if rushed or
threatened.

## Ettin

  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Large Giant
  Hit Dice:              10d8+20 (65 hp)
  Initiative:            +3
  Speed:                 30 ft. in hide armor (6 squares); base speed 40 ft.
  Armor Class:           18 (--1 size, --1 Dex, +7 natural, +3 hide), touch 8, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +7/+17
  Attack:                Morningstar +12 melee (2d6+6) or javelin +5 ranged (1d8+6)
  Full Attack:           2 morningstars +12/+7 melee (2d6+6) or 2 javelins +5 ranged (1d8+6)
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, superior two-weapon fighting
  Saves:                 Fort +9, Ref +2, Will +5
  Abilities:             Str 23, Dex 8, Con 15, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 11
  Skills:                Listen +10, Search +1, Spot +10
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Initiative, Iron Will, Power Attack
  Environment:           Cold hills
  Organization:          Solitary, gang (2--4), troupe (1--2 plus 1--2 brown bears), band (3--5 plus 1--2 brown bears), or colony (3--5 plus 1--2 brown bears and 7--12 orcs or 9--16 goblins)
  Challenge Rating:      6
  Treasure:              Standard
  Alignment:             Usually chaotic evil
  Advancement:           By character class
  Level Adjustment:      +5
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ettins, or two-headed giants, are vicious and unpredictable hunters that
stalk the night.

An ettin never bathes if it can help it, which usually leaves it so
grimy and dirty its skin resembles thick, gray hide. Adult ettins are
about 13 feet tall and weigh 5,200 pounds. They live about 75 years.

Ettins have no language of their own but speak a pidgin of Orc, Goblin,
and Giant. Creatures that can speak any of these languages must succeed
on a DC 15 Intelligence check to communicate with an ettin. Check once
for each bit of information: If the other creature speaks two of these
languages, the DC is 10, and for someone who speaks all three, the DC is
5.

### Combat {#ettin--combat}

Though ettins aren't very intelligent, they are cunning fighters.

They prefer to ambush their victims rather than charge into a straight
fight, but once the battle has started, an ettin usually fights
furiously until all enemies are dead.

**Superior Two-Weapon Fighting (Ex):** An ettin fights with a
morningstar or javelin in each hand. Because each of its two heads
controls an arm, the ettin does not take a penalty on attack or damage
rolls for attacking with two weapons.

Skills: An ettin's two heads give it a +2 racial bonus on Listen, Spot,
and Search checks.

## Fiendish Creature

Fiendish creatures dwell on the lower planes, the realms of evil,
although they resemble beings found on the Material Plane. They are more
fearsome in appearance than their earthly counterparts.

### Creating a Fiendish Creature

"Fiendish" is an inherited template that can be added to any corporeal
aberration, animal, dragon, fey, giant, humanoid, magical beast,
monstrous humanoid, ooze, plant, or vermin of nongood alignment
(referred to thereafter as the base creature).

A fiendish creature uses all the base creature's statistics and
abilities except as noted here. Do not recalculate the creature's Hit
Dice, base attack bonus, saves, or skill points if its type changes.

**Size and Type:** Animals or vermin with this template become magical
beasts, but otherwise the creature type is unchanged. Size is unchanged.
Fiendish creatures encountered on the Material Plane have the
extraplanar subtype.

**Special Attacks:** A fiendish creature retains all the special attacks
of the base creature and also gains the following special attack.

***Smite Good (Su):***Once per day the creature can make a normal melee
attack to deal extra damage equal to its HD total (maximum of +20)
against a good foe.

**Special Qualities:** A fiendish creature retains all the special
qualities of the base creature and also gains the following.

---Darkvision out to 60 feet.

---Damage reduction (see the table below).

---Resistance to cold and fire (see the table below).

---Spell resistance equal to the creature's HD + 5 (maximum 25).

If the base creature already has one or more of these special qualities,
use the better value.

If a fiendish creature gains damage reduction, its natural weapons are
treated as magic weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.

**Abilities:** Same as the base creature, but Intelligence is at least
3.

**Environment:** Any evil-aligned plane.

**Challenge Rating:** HD 3 or less, as base creature; HD 4 to 7, as

base creature +1; HD 8 or more, as base creature +2.

**Alignment:** Always evil (any).

**Level Adjustment:** Same as the base creature +2.

  ------------ ----------------------------- ------------------
  Hit Dice     Resistance to Cold and Fire   Damage Reduction
  1--3         5                             ---
  4--7         5                             5/magic
  8--11        10                            5/magic
  12 or more   10                            10/magic
  ------------ ----------------------------- ------------------

## Formian

  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Formian Worker                                                                                                                                     Formian Warrior                                                                                                                    Formian Taskmaster
                         Small Outsider [(Lawful, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                                                     Medium Outsider [(Lawful, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                                    Medium Outsider [(Lawful, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              1d8+1 (5 hp)                                                                                                                                       4d8+8 (26 hp)                                                                                                                      6d8+12 (39 hp)
  Initiative:            +2                                                                                                                                                 +3                                                                                                                                 +7
  Speed:                 40 ft. (8 squares)                                                                                                                                 40 ft. (8 squares)                                                                                                                 40 ft. (8 squares)
  Armor Class:           17 (+1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 15                                                                                         18 (+3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 15                                                                                  19 (+3 Dex, +6 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 16
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/--2                                                                                                                                             +4/+7                                                                                                                              +6/+10
  Attack:                Bite +3 melee (1d4+1)                                                                                                                              Sting +7 melee (2d4+3 plus poison)                                                                                                 Sting +10 melee (2d4+4 plus poison)
  Full Attack:           Bite +3 melee (1d4+1)                                                                                                                              Sting +7 melee (2d4+3 plus poison) and 2 claws +5 melee (1d6+1) and bite +5 melee (1d4+1)                                          Sting +10 melee (2d4+4 plus poison) and 2 claws +8 melee (1d6+2)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./5 ft.                                                                                                                                        5 ft./5 ft.                                                                                                                        5 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       ---                                                                                                                                                Poison                                                                                                                             Dominate monster, dominated creature, poison
  Special Qualities:     *Cure serious wounds,* hive mind, immunity to poison, petrification, and cold, *make whole,* resistance to electricity 10, fire 10, and sonic 10   Hive mind, immunity to poison, petrification, and cold, resistance to electricity 10, fire 10, and sonic 10, spell resistance 18   Hive mind, immunity to poison, petrification, and cold, resistance to electricity 10, fire 10, and sonic 10, spell resistance 21, telepathy 100 ft.
  Saves:                 Fort +3, Ref +4, Will +2                                                                                                                           Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +5                                                                                                           Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +8
  Abilities:             Str 13, Dex 14, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 9                                                                                                       Str 17, Dex 16, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 11                                                                                     Str 18, Dex 16, Con 14, Int 11, Wis 16, Cha 19
  Skills:                Climb +10, Craft (any one) +5, Hide +6, Listen +4, Search +2, Spot +4                                                                              Climb +10, Hide +10, Jump +14, Listen +8, Move Silently +10, (+3 following tracks), Tumble +12                                     Climb +13, Diplomacy +6, Hide +12, Intimidate +13, Listen +12, Search +7, Spot +8, Survival +1 Move Silently +12, Search +9, Sense Motive +12, Spot +12, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)
  Feats:                 Skill Focus (Craft \[selected skill\])                                                                                                             Dodge, Multiattack                                                                                                                 Dodge, Improved Initiative, Multiattack
  Environment:           A lawful-aligned plane                                                                                                                             A lawful-aligned plane                                                                                                             A lawful-aligned plane
  Organization:          Team (2--4) or crew (7--18)                                                                                                                        Solitary, team (2--4), or troop (6--11)                                                                                            Solitary (1 plus 1 dominated creature) or conscription team (2--4 plus 1 dominated creature per team member)
  Challenge Rating:      1/2                                                                                                                                                3                                                                                                                                  7
  Treasure:              None                                                                                                                                               None                                                                                                                               Standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful neutral                                                                                                                              Always lawful neutral                                                                                                              Always lawful neutral
  Advancement:           2--3 HD (Medium)                                                                                                                                   5--8 HD (Medium); 9--12 HD (Large)                                                                                                 7--9 HD (Medium); 10--12 HD (Large)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                                                                                                ---                                                                                                                                ---
  ---------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Formian Myrmarch                                                                                                                                                                           Formian Queen
                         Large Outsider [(Lawful, Extraplanar)]{.small}                                                                                                                                             Large Outsider [(Lawful, Extraplanar)]{.small}
  Hit Dice:              12d8+48 (102 hp)                                                                                                                                                                           20d8+100 (190 hp)
  Initiative:            +8                                                                                                                                                                                         --5
  Speed:                 50 ft. (10 squares)                                                                                                                                                                        0 ft.
  Armor Class:           28 (--1 size, +4 Dex, +15 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 24                                                                                                                               23 (--1 size, +14 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 23
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +12/+20                                                                                                                                                                                    +20/+24
  Attack:                Sting +15 melee (2d4+4 plus poison) or javelin +15 ranged (1d6+4)                                                                                                                          ---
  Full Attack:           Sting +15 melee (2d4+4 plus poison) and bite +13 melee (2d6+2); or javelin +15/+10 ranged (1d6+4)                                                                                          ---
  Space/Reach:           10 ft./5 ft.                                                                                                                                                                               10 ft./5 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Poison, spell-like abilities                                                                                                                                                               Spell-like abilities, spells
  Special Qualities:     Fast healing 2, hive mind, immunity to poison, petrification, and cold, resistance to electricity 10, fire 10, and sonic 10, spell resistance 25                                           Fast healing 2, hive mind, immunity to poison, petrification, and cold, resistance to electricity 10, fire 10, and sonic 10, spell resistance 30, telepathy
  Saves:                 Fort +12, Ref +12, Will +11                                                                                                                                                                Fort +19, Ref ---, Will +19
  Abilities:             Str 19, Dex 18, Con 18, Int 16, Wis 16, Cha 17                                                                                                                                             Str ---, Dex ---, Con 20, Int 20, Wis 20, Cha 21
  Skills:                Climb +19, Concentration +18, Diplomacy +20, Hide +15, Knowledge (any one) +18, Listen +18, Move Silently +19, Search +18, Sense Motive +18, Spot +18, Survival +3 (+5 following tracks)   Appraise +28, Bluff +28, Concentration +28, Diplomacy +32, Disguise +5 (+7 acting), Intimidate +30, Knowledge (any three) +28, Listen +30, Sense Motive +28, Spellcraft +28 (+30 scrolls), Spot +30, Use Magic Device +28 (+30 scrolls)
  Feats:                 Dodge, Improved Initiative, Mobility, Multiattack, Spring Attack                                                                                                                           Alertness, Eschew Materials^B^, Great Fortitude, Improved Counterspell, Iron Will, item creation feat (any one), Maximize Spell, Spell Focus (enchantment)
  Environment:           A lawful-aligned plane                                                                                                                                                                     A lawful-aligned plane
  Organization:          Solitary, team (2--4), or platoon (1 plus 7--18 workers and 6--11 warriors)                                                                                                                Hive (1 plus 100--400 workers, 11--40 warriors, 4--7 taskmasters with 1 dominated creature each, and 5--8 myrmarchs)
  Challenge Rating:      10                                                                                                                                                                                         17
  Treasure:              Standard                                                                                                                                                                                   Double standard
  Alignment:             Always lawful neutral                                                                                                                                                                      Always lawful neutral
  Advancement:           13--18 HD (Large); 19--24 HD (Huge)                                                                                                                                                        21--30 HD (Huge); 31--40 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                                                                                                                                                                        ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A formian resembles a cross between an ant and a centaur. All formians
are covered in a brownish-red carapace; size and appearance differs for
each variety.

### Combat {#formian--combat}

Formians are generally aggressive, seeking to subdue all they encounter.
If they perceive even the slightest threat to their hive-city or to
their queen, they attack immediately and fight to the death. Any formian
also attacks immediately if ordered to do so by a superior.

**Hive Mind (Ex):** All formians within 50 miles of their queen are in
constant communication. If one is aware of a particular danger, they all
are. If one in a group is not flatfooted, none of them are. No formian
in a group is considered flanked unless all of them are.

### Worker

While workers cannot speak, they can convey simple concepts (such as
danger) by body movements. Through the hive mind, however, they can
communicate just fine---although their intelligence still limits the
concepts that they can grasp.

A worker is about 3 feet long and about 2-1/2 feet high at the front. It
weighs about 60 pounds. Its hands are suitable only for manual labor.

#### Combat {#worker--combat}

Formian workers fight only to defend their hive-cities, using their
mandibled bite.

A formian worker's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields,
are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

***Cure Serious Wounds* (Sp):** Eight workers together can heal a
creature's wounds as though using the *cure serious wounds* spell
(caster level 7th). This is a full-round action for all eight workers.

***Make Whole* (Sp):** Three workers together can repair an object as
though using the *make whole* spell (caster level 7th). This is a
fullround action for all three workers.

### Warrior

Warriors communicate through the hive mind to convey battle plans and
make reports to their commanders. They cannot speak otherwise.

A warrior is about is about 5 feet long and about 4-1/2 feet high at the
front. It weighs about 180 pounds.

#### Combat {#warrior--combat}

Warriors are wicked combatants, using claws, bite, and a poisonous sting
all at once. Through the hive mind, they attack with coordinated and
extremely efficient tactics.

A formian warrior's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields,
are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 14, initial and secondary damage
1d6 Str. The save DC is Constitution-based.

### Taskmaster

These formians communicate only telepathically and derive sustenance
from the mental energies of those they dominate.

A taskmaster is about the same size as a warrior.

#### Combat {#taskmaster--combat}

Taskmasters rely on their dominated slaves to fight for them if at all
possible. If necessary, though, they can defend themselves with claws
and a poison sting.

A formian taskmaster's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it
wields, are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction.

**Dominate Monster (Su):** A taskmaster can use a *dominate monster*
ability as the spell from a 10th-level caster (Will DC 17 negates),
although the subject may be of any kind and may be up to Large size.
Creatures that successfully save cannot be affected by the same
taskmaster's dominate monster ability for 24 hours. A single taskmaster
can dominate up to four subjects at a time. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Dominated Creature (Ex):** A taskmaster is never encountered alone.
One dominated nonformian creature always accompanies it (choose or
determine randomly any creature of CR 4).

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 15, initial and secondary damage
1d6 Str. The save DC is Constitution-based.

### Myrmarch

Myrmarchs are the elite of formian society. Much more than those beneath
them, these creatures are individuals, with goals, desires, and creative
thought.

A myrmarch is about is about 7 feet long and about 5-1/2 feet high at
the front. It weighs about 1,500 pounds. Its claws are capable of fine
manipulation, like human hands. Each myrmarch wears a bronze helm to
signify its position (the more elaborate the helm, the more prestigious
the position).

Myrmarchs speak Formian and Common.

#### Combat {#myrmarch--combat}

Myrmarchs' claws are like hands and thus serve no combat purpose.

Myrmarchs occasionally employ javelins for ranged attacks, coated with
poison from their own stingers.

They fight intelligently, aiding those under them (if any such are
present) and commanding them through the hive mind. If chaotic creatures
are present, however, a myrmarch is singleminded in its quest to destroy
them.

A formian myrmarch's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields,
are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage
reduction.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 20, initial and secondary damage
2d6 Dex. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*charm monster* (DC 17),
*clairaudience/ clairvoyance, detect chaos, detect thoughts* (DC 15),
*magic circle against chaos*, *greater teleport;* 1/day---*dictum* (DC
20), *order's wrath* (DC 17). Caster level 12th. The save DCs are
Charisma-based.

### Queen

The formian queen cannot move. With her telepathic abilities, though,
she can send instructions to and get reports from any formian within her
range.

She is about 10 feet long, perhaps 4 feet high, and weighs about 3,500
pounds.

The queen speaks Formian and Common, although she can communicate with
any creature telepathically.

#### Combat {#queen--combat}

The queen does not fight. She has no ability to move. If necessary, a
team of workers and myrmarchs (or dominated slaves) haul her enormous
bulk to where she needs to go. This sort of occurrence is very rare,
however, and most of the time the queen remains within her well-defended
chambers.

Despite her utter lack of physical activity, the queen can cast spells
and use spell-like abilities to great effect in her own defense as well
as the defense of the hive-city.

**Spells:** The queen casts arcane spells as a 17th-level sorcerer.

*Typical Sorcerer Spells Known* (6/8/7/7/7/7/6/6/4, base save DC 15 +
spell level): 0---*acid splash, arcane mark, daze, detect magic, light,
mage hand, read magic, resistance, touch of fatigue;* 1st---*comprehend
languages, identify, mage armor, magic missile, shield;* 2nd---
*hypnotic pattern, invisibility, protection from arrows, resist energy,
scorching ray;* 3rd---*dispel magic, heroism, nondetection, slow;*
4th--- *confusion, detect scrying, black tentacles, scrying;*
5th---*cone of cold, dismissal, teleport, wall of force;* 6th---*analyze
dweomer, geas/quest, repulsion;* 7th---*summon monster VII, vision,
waves of exhaustion;* 8th---*prismatic wall, temporal stasis.*

**Spell-Like Abilities:** At will---*calm emotions* (DC 17), *charm
monster* (DC 19), *clairaudience/clairvoyance, detect chaos, detect
thoughts, dictum* (DC 22), *divination, hold monster* (DC 20), *magic
circle against chaos, order's wrath* (DC 19), *shield of law* (DC 23),
*true seeing.* Caster level 17th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

**Telepathy (Su):** The queen can communicate telepathically with any
intelligent creature within 50 miles whose presence she is aware of.

## Frost Worm

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Huge Magical Beast (Cold)
  Hit Dice:              14d10+70 (147 hp)
  Initiative:            +4
  Speed:                 30 ft. (6 squares), burrow 10 ft.
  Armor Class:           18 (--2 size, +10 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 18
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +14/+30
  Attack:                Bite +21 melee (2d8+12 plus 1d8 cold)
  Full Attack:           Bite +21 melee (2d8+12 plus 1d8 cold)
  Space/Reach:           15 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Trill, cold, breath weapon
  Special Qualities:     Darkvision 60 ft., death throes, immunity to cold, low-light vision, vulnerability to fire
  Saves:                 Fort +14, Ref +9, Will +6
  Abilities:             Str 26, Dex 10, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 11, Cha 11
  Skills:                Hide +3\*, Listen +5, Spot +5
  Feats:                 Alertness, Improved Initiative, Improved Natural Attack (bite), Iron Will, Weapon Focus (bite)
  Environment:           Cold plains
  Organization:          Solitary
  Challenge Rating:      12
  Treasure:              None
  Alignment:             Usually neutral
  Advancement:           15--21 HD (Huge); 22--42 HD (Gargantuan)
  Level Adjustment:      ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A frost worn cannot burrow through stone, but can manage ice and frozen
earth. When moving through such hard materials it leaves behind a usable
tunnel about 5 feet in diameter.

A frost worm is about 40 feet long, 5 feet in diameter, and weighs about
8,000 pounds.

### Combat {#frost-worm--combat}

Frost worms lurk under the snow, waiting for prey to come near.

They begin an attack with a trill and then set upon helpless prey with
their bite.

**Trill (Su):** A frost worm can emit a noise that forces its prey to
stand motionless. This sonic mind-affecting compulsion affects all
creatures other than frost worms within a 100-foot radius. Creatures
must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or be stunned for as long as the worm
trills and for 1d4 rounds thereafter, even if they are attacked.
However, if attacked or violently shaken (a full-round action), a victim
is allowed another saving throw. Once a creature has resisted or broken
the effect, it cannot be affected again by that same frost worm's trill
for 24 hours. The effect's caster level is 14th. The save DC is
Charisma-based.

**Cold (Ex):** A frost worm's body generates intense cold, causing
opponents to take an extra 1d8 points of cold damage every time the
creature succeeds on a bite attack. Creatures attacking a frost worm
unarmed or with natural weapons take this same cold damage each time one
of their attacks hits.

**Breath Weapon (Su):** 30-foot cone, once per hour, damage 15d6 cold,
Reflex DC 22 half. Opponents held motionless by the frost worm's trill
get no saving throw. The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Death Throes (Ex):** When killed, a frost worm turns to ice and
shatters in an explosion that deals 12d6 points of cold damage and 8d6
points of piercing damage to everything within 100 feet (Reflex half DC
22). The save DC is Constitution-based.

**Skills:** \*A frost worm, due to its coloration and its affinity for
burying itself in the snow, has a +10 racial bonus on Hide checks in its
native environment.

## Fungus

  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Shrieker                                          Violet Fungus
                         Medium Plant                                      Medium Plant
  Hit Dice:              2d8+2 (11 hp)                                     2d8+6 (15 hp)
  Initiative:            --5                                               --1
  Speed:                 0 ft.                                             10 ft. (2 squares)
  Armor Class:           8 (--5 Dex, +3 natural), touch 5, flat-footed 8   13 (--1 Dex, +4 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 13
  Base Attack/Grapple:   +1/--4                                            +1/+3
  Attack:                ---                                               Tentacle +3 melee (1d6+2 plus poison)
  Full Attack:           ---                                               4 tentacles +3 melee (1d6+2 plus poison)
  Space/Reach:           5 ft./0 ft.                                       5 ft./10 ft.
  Special Attacks:       Shriek                                            Poison
  Special Qualities:     Low-light vision, plant traits                    Low-light vision, plant traits
  Saves:                 Fort +4, Ref ---, Will --4                        Fort +6, Ref --1, Will +0
  Abilities:             Str ---, Dex ---, Con 13, Int ---, Wis 2, Cha 1   Str 14, Dex 8, Con 16, Int ---, Wis 11, Cha 9
  Skills:                ---                                               ---
  Feats:                 ---                                               ---
  Environment:           Underground                                       Underground
  Organization:          Solitary or patch (3--5)                          Solitary, patch (2--4), or mixed patch (2--4 violet fungi and 3--5 shriekers)
  Challenge Rating:      1                                                 3
  Treasure:              None                                              None
  Alignment:             Always neutral                                    Always neutral
  Advancement:           3 HD (Medium)                                     3--6 HD (Medium)
  Level Adjustment:      ---                                               ---
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Combat {#fungus--combat}

Shriekers and violet fungi often work together to attract and kill prey.
When the shriekers' hellish racket attracts a curious creature, the
violet fungus tries to kill it. Both creatures enjoy the fruits of a
successful hunt.

### Shrieker

A shrieker is a stationary fungus that emits a loud noise to attract
prey or when disturbed. Shriekers live in dark, subterranean places,
often in the company of violet fungi, whose poison they are immune to.

Shriekers come in of shades of purple.

#### Combat {#shrieker--combat}

A shrieker has no means of attack. Instead, it lures prey to its
vicinity by emitting a loud noise.

**Shriek (Ex):** Movement or a light source within 10 feet of a shrieker
causes the fungus to emit a piercing sound that lasts for 1d3 rounds.
The sound attracts nearby creatures that are disposed to investigate it.
Some creatures that live near shriekers come to learn that the fungus's
noise means there is food nearby.

### Violet Fungus

Violet fungi resemble shriekers and are often found growing among them.

A violet fungi's coloration ranges from purple overall to dull gray or
violet covered with purple spots.

#### Combat {#violet-fungus--combat}

A violet fungus flails about with its tentacles at living creatures that
come within its reach.

**Poison (Ex):** Injury, Fortitude DC 14, initial and secondary damage
1d4 Str and 1d4 Con. The save DC is Constitution-based.
