---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Magic Items / Magic Items II (Armor and Weapons)
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# MAGIC ITEMS II (ARMOR & WEAPONS)

## Table of Contents

-   [Armor](#armor)
-   [Magic Armor and Shield Special Ability
    Descriptions](#magic-armor-and-shield-special-ability-descriptions)
-   [Specific Armors](#specific-armors)
    -   [Specific Shields](#specific-shields)
-   [Weapons](#weapons)
-   [Magic Weapon Special Ability
    Descriptions](#magic-weapon-special-ability-descriptions)
-   [Specific Weapons](#specific-weapons)

## Armor

In general, magic armor protects the wearer to a greater extent than
nonmagical armor. Magic armor bonuses are enhancement bonuses, never
rise above +5, and stack with regular armor bonuses (and with shield and
magic shield enhancement bonuses). All magic armor is also masterwork
armor, reducing armor check penalties by 1.

In addition to an enhancement bonus, armor may have special abilities.
Special abilities usually count as additional bonuses for determining
the market value of an item, but do not improve AC. A suit of armor
cannot have an effective bonus (enhancement plus special ability bonus
equivalents) higher than +10. A suit of armor with a special ability
must have at least a +1 enhancement bonus.

A suit of armor or a shield may be made of an unusual material. Roll d%:
01--95 indicates that the item is of a standard sort, and 96--100
indicates that it is made of a special material.

Armor is always created so that even if the type of armor comes with
boots or gauntlets, these pieces can be switched for other magic boots
or gauntlets.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------- --------- ----------------------------------- ------------
  Minor                                                                                                                                Medium    Major     Item                                Base Price
  01--60                                                                                                                               01--05    ---       +1 shield                           1,000 gp
  61--80                                                                                                                               06--10    \-        +1 armor                            1,000 gp
  81--85                                                                                                                               11--20    ---       +2 shield                           4,000 gp
  86--87                                                                                                                               21--30    ---       +2 armor                            4,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  31--40    01--08    +3 shield                           9,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  41--50    09--16    +3 armor                            9,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  51--55    17--27    +4 shield                           16,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  56--57    28--38    +4 armor                            16,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       39--49    +5 shield                           25,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       50--57    +5 armor                            25,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       ---       *+6 armor/shield*^1^                36,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       ---       *+7 armor/shield*^1^                49,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       ---       *+8 armor/shield*^1^                64,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       ---       *+9 armor/shield*^1^                81,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                                  ---       ---       *+10 armor/shield*^1^               100,000 gp
  88--89                                                                                                                               58--60    58--60    Specific armor^2^                   ---
  90--91                                                                                                                               61--63    61--63    Specific shield^3^                  ---
  92--100                                                                                                                              64--100   64--100   Special ability and roll again^4^   ---
  1 Armor and shields can't actually have bonuses this high. Use these lines to determine price when special abilities are added in.                                                           
  2 Roll on Table: Specific Armors.                                                                                                                                                            
  3 Roll on Table: Specific Shields.                                                                                                                                                           
  4 Roll on Table: Armor Special Abilities or Table: Shield Special Abilities.                                                                                                                 
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------- --------- ----------------------------------- ------------

  : Table: Armor and Shields

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------- ---------------
  d%                                                                                        Armor             Armor Cost^1^
  01                                                                                        Padded            +155 gp
  02                                                                                        Leather           +160 gp
  03--17                                                                                    Studded leather   +175 gp
  18--32                                                                                    Chain shirt       +250 gp
  33--42                                                                                    Hide              +165 gp
  43                                                                                        Scale mail        +200 gp
  44                                                                                        Chainmail         +300 gp
  45--57                                                                                    Breastplate       +350 gp
  58                                                                                        Splint mail       +350 gp
  59                                                                                        Banded mail       +400 gp
  60                                                                                        Half-plate        +750 gp
  61--100                                                                                   Full plate        +1,650 gp
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Armor and Shields to determine total market price.                     
  All magic armor is masterwork armor (with an armor check penalty 1 less than normal).                       
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------- ---------------

  : Table: Random Armor Type

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----------------
  d%                                                                                           Shield                  Shield Cost^1^
  01--10                                                                                       Buckler                 +165 gp
  11--15                                                                                       Shield, light, wooden   +153 gp
  16--20                                                                                       Shield, light, steel    +159 gp
  21--30                                                                                       Shield, heavy, wooden   +157 gp
  31--95                                                                                       Shield, heavy, steel    +170 gp
  96--100                                                                                      Shield, tower           +180 gp
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Armor and Shields to determine total market price.                              
  All magic shields are masterwork shields (with an armor check penalty 1 less than normal).                           
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----------------

  : Table: Random Shield Type

**Caster Level for Armor and Shields:** The caster level of a magic
shield or magic armor with a special ability is given in the item
description. For an item with only an enhancement bonus, the caster
level is three times the enhancement bonus. If an item has both an
enhancement bonus and a special ability, the higher of the two caster
level requirements must be met.

**Shields:** Shield enhancement bonuses stack with armor enhancement
bonuses. Shield enhancement bonuses do not act as attack or damage
bonuses when the shield is used in a bash. The bashing special ability,
however, does grant a +1 bonus on attack and damage rolls (see the
special ability description).

A shield could be built that also acted as a magic weapon, but the cost
of the enhancement bonus on attack rolls would need to be added into the
cost of the shield and its enhancement bonus to AC.

As with armor, special abilities built into the shield add to the market
value in the form of additions to the bonus of the shield, although they
do not improve AC. A shield cannot have an effective bonus (enhancement
plus special ability bonus equivalents) higher than +10. A shield with a
special ability must have at least a +1 enhancement bonus.

**Shield Hardness and Hit Points:** Each +1 of enhancement bonus adds 2
to a shield's hardness and +10 to its hit points.

**Activation:** Usually a character benefits from magic armor and
shields in exactly the way a character benefits from nonmagical armor
and shields---by wearing them. If armor or a shield has a special
ability that the user needs to activate then the user usually needs to
utter the command word (a standard action).

**Armor for Unusual Creatures:** The cost of armor for nonhumanoid
creatures, as well as for creatures who are neither Small nor Medium,
varies. The cost of the masterwork quality and any magical enhancement
remains the same.

## Magic Armor and Shield Special Ability Descriptions

Most magic armor and shields only have enhancement bonuses. Such items
can also have one or more of the special abilities detailed below. Armor
or a shield with a special ability must have at least a +1 enhancement
bonus.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- ---------------------------------- ---------------------
  Minor                                                                                                                           Medium   Major    Special Ability                    Base Price Modifier
  01--25                                                                                                                          01--05   01--03   Glamered                           +2,700 gp
  26--32                                                                                                                          06--08   04       Fortification, light               +1 bonus^1^
  33--52                                                                                                                          09--11   ---      Slick                              +3,750 gp
  53--72                                                                                                                          12--14   ---      Shadow                             +3,750 gp
  73--92                                                                                                                          15--17   ---      Silent moves                       +3,750 gp
  93--96                                                                                                                          18--19   ---      Spell resistance (13)              +2 bonus^1^
  97                                                                                                                              20--29   05--07   Slick, improved                    +15,000 gp
  98                                                                                                                              30--39   08--10   Shadow, improved                   +15,000 gp
  99                                                                                                                              40--49   11--13   Silent moves, improved             +15,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             50--54   14--16   Acid resistance                    +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             55--59   17--19   Cold resistance                    +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             60--64   20--22   Electricity resistance             +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             65--69   23--25   Fire resistance                    +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             70--74   26--28   Sonic resistance                   +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             75--79   29--33   Ghost touch                        +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             80--84   34--35   Invulnerability                    +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             85--89   36--40   Fortification, moderate            +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             90--94   41--42   Spell resistance (15)              +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             95--99   43       Wild                               +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      44--48   Slick, greater                     +33,750 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      49--53   Shadow, greater                    +33,750 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      54--58   Silent moves, greater              +33,750 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      59--63   Acid resistance, improved          +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      64--68   Cold resistance, improved          +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      69--73   Electricity resistance, improved   +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      74--78   Fire resistance, improved          +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      79--83   Sonic resistance, improved         +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      84--88   Spell resistance (17)              +4 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      89       Etherealness                       +49,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      90       Undead controlling                 +49,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      91--92   Fortification, heavy               +5 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      93--94   Spell resistance (19)              +5 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      95       Acid resistance, greater           +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      96       Cold resistance, greater           +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      97       Electricity resistance, greater    +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      98       Fire resistance, greater           +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      99       Sonic resistance, greater          +66,000 gp
  100                                                                                                                             100      100      Roll twice again^2^                ---
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Armor and Shields to determine total market price.                                                                                              
  2 If you roll a special ability twice, only one counts. If you roll two versions of the same special ability, use the better.                                                        
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- ---------------------------------- ---------------------

  : Table: Armor Special Abilities

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- ---------------------------------- ---------------------
  Minor                                                                                                                           Medium   Major    Special Ability                    Base Price Modifier
  01--20                                                                                                                          01--10   01--05   Arrow catching                     +1 bonus^1^
  21--40                                                                                                                          11--20   06--08   Bashing                            +1 bonus^1^
  41--50                                                                                                                          21--25   09--10   Blinding                           +1 bonus^1^
  51--75                                                                                                                          26--40   11--15   Fortification, light               +1 bonus^1^
  76--92                                                                                                                          41--50   16--20   Arrow deflection                   +2 bonus^1^
  93--97                                                                                                                          51--57   21--25   Animated                           +2 bonus^1^
  98--99                                                                                                                          58--59   ---      Spell resistance (13)              +2 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             60--63   26--28   Acid resistance                    +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             64--67   29--31   Cold resistance                    +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             68--71   32--34   Electricity resistance             +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             72--75   35--37   Fire resistance                    +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             76--79   38--40   Sonic resistance                   +18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             80--85   41--46   Ghost touch                        +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             86--95   47--56   Fortification, moderate            +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             96--98   57--58   Spell resistance (15)              +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             99       59       Wild                               +3 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      60--64   Acid resistance, improved          +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      65--69   Cold resistance, improved          +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      70--74   Electricity resistance, improved   +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      75--79   Fire resistance, improved          +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      80--84   Sonic resistance, improved         +42,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      85--86   Spell resistance (17)              +4 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      87       Undead controlling                 +49,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      88--91   Fortification, heavy               +5 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      92--93   Reflecting                         +5 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      94       Spell resistance (19)              +5 bonus^1^
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      95       Acid resistance, greater           +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      96       Cold resistance, greater           +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      97       Electricity resistance, greater    +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      98       Fire resistance, greater           +66,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                             ---      99       Sonic resistance, greater          +66,000 gp
  100                                                                                                                             100      100      Roll twice again2                  ---
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Armor and Shields to determine total market price.                                                                                              
  2 If you roll a special ability twice, only one counts. If you roll two versions of the same special ability, use the better.                                                        
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- ---------------------------------- ---------------------

  : Table: Shield Special Abilities

**Acid Resistance:** A suit of armor or a shield with this property
normally has a dull gray appearance. The armor absorbs the first 10
points of acid damage per attack that the wearer would normally take
(similar to the *resist energy* spell).

Faint abjuration; CL 3rd; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist energy;*
Price +18,000 gp.

**Acid Resistance, Improved:** As acid resistance, except it absorbs the
first 20 points of acid damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +42,000 gp.

**Acid Resistance, Greater:** As acid resistance, except it absorbs the
first 30 points of acid damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +66,000 gp.

**Animated:** Upon command, an animated shield floats within 2 feet of
the wielder, protecting her as if she were using it herself but freeing
up both her hands. Only one shield can protect a character at a time. A
character with an animated shield still takes any penalties associated
with shield use, such as armor check penalty, arcane spell failure
chance, and nonproficiency.

Strong transmutation; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *animate
objects;* Price +2 bonus.

**Arrow Catching:** A shield with this ability attracts ranged weapons
to it. It has a deflection bonus of +1 against ranged weapons because
projectiles and thrown weapons veer toward it. Additionally, any
projectile or thrown weapon aimed at a target within 5 feet of the
shield's wearer diverts from its original target and targets the
shield's bearer instead. (If the wielder has total cover relative to the
attacker, the projectile or thrown weapon is not diverted.)
Additionally, those attacking the wearer with ranged weapons ignore any
miss chances that would normally apply. Projectiles and thrown weapons
that have an enhancement bonus higher than the shield's base AC bonus
are not diverted to the wearer (but the shield's increased AC bonus
still applies against these weapons). The wielder can activate or
deactivate this ability with a command word.

Moderate abjuration; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *entropic
shield*; Price +1 bonus.

**Arrow Deflection:** This shield protects the wielder as if he had the
Deflect Arrows feat. Once per round when he would normally be struck by
a ranged weapon, he can make a DC 20 Reflex save. If the ranged weapon
has an enhancement bonus, the DC increases by that amount. If he
succeeds, the shield deflects the weapon. He must be aware of the attack
and not flat-footed. Attempting to deflect a ranged weapon doesn't count
as an action. Exceptional ranged weapons, such as boulders hurled by
giants or *acid arrows*, can't be deflected.

Faint abjuration; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *shield;* Price +2
bonus.

**Bashing:** A shield with this special ability is designed to perform a
shield bash. A bashing shield deals damage as if it were a weapon of two
size categories larger (a Medium light shield thus deals 1d6 points of
damage and a Medium heavy shield deals 1d8 points of damage). The shield
acts as a +1 weapon when used to bash. (Only light and heavy shields can
have this ability.)

Moderate transmutation; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *bull's
strength;* Price +1 bonus.

**Blinding:** A shield with this ability flashes with a brilliant light
up to twice per day upon command of the wielder. Anyone within 20 feet
except the wielder must make a DC 14 Reflex save or be blinded for 1d4
rounds.

Moderate evocation; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *searing light;*
Price +1 bonus.

**Cold Resistance:** A suit of armor or a shield with this property
normally has a bluish, icy hue or is adorned with furs and shaggy pelts.
The armor absorbs the first 10 points of cold damage per attack that the
wearer would normally take (similar to the *resist energy* spell).

Faint abjuration; CL 3rd; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist energy;*
Price +18,000 gp.

**Cold Resistance, Improved:** As cold resistance, except it absorbs the
first 20 points of cold damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +42,000 gp.

**Cold Resistance, Greater:** As cold resistance, except it absorbs the
first 30 points of cold damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +66,000 gp.

**Electricity Resistance:** A suit of armor or a shield with this
property normally has a bluish hue and often bears a storm or lightning
motif. The armor absorbs the first 10 points of electricity damage per
attack that the wearer would normally take (similar to the *resist
energy* spell).

Faint abjuration; CL 3rd; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist energy;*
Price +18,000 gp.

**Electricity Resistance, Improved:** As electricity resistance, except
it absorbs the first 20 points of electricity damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +42,000 gp.

**Electricity Resistance, Greater:** As electricity resistance, except
it absorbs the first 30 points of electricity damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +66,000 gp.

**Etherealness:** On command, this ability allows the wearer of the
armor to become ethereal (as the *ethereal jaunt* spell) once per day.
The character can remain ethereal for as long as desired, but once he
returns to normal, he cannot become ethereal again that day.

Strong transmutation; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *ethereal
jaunt;* Price +49,000 gp.

**Fire Resistance:** A suit of armor with this ability normally has a
reddish hue and often is decorated with a draconic motif. The armor
absorbs the first 10 points of fire damage per attack that the wearer
would normally take (similar to the *resist energy* spell).

Faint abjuration; CL 3rd; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist energy;*
Price +18,000 gp.

**Fire Resistance, Improved:** As fire resistance, except it absorbs the
first 20 points of fire damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +42,000 gp.

**Fire Resistance, Greater:** As fire resistance, except it absorbs the
first 30 points of fire damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +66,000 gp.

**Fortification:** This suit of armor or shield produces a magical force
that protects vital areas of the wearer more effectively. When a
critical hit or sneak attack is scored on the wearer, there is a chance
that the critical hit or sneak attack is negated and damage is instead
rolled normally.

  -------------------- -------------------------- ---------------------
  Fortification Type   Chance for Normal Damage   Base Price Modifier
  Light                25%                        +1 bonus
  Moderate             75%                        +3 bonus
  Heavy                100%                       +5 bonus
  -------------------- -------------------------- ---------------------

Strong abjuration; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *limited wish*
or *miracle;* Price varies (see above).

**Ghost Touch:** This armor or shield seems almost translucent. Both its
enhancement bonus and its armor bonus count against the attacks of
incorporeal creatures. It can be picked up, moved, and worn by
incorporeal creatures at any time. Incorporeal creatures gain the armor
or shield's enhancement bonus against both corporeal and incorporeal
attacks, and they can still pass freely through solid objects.

Strong transmutation; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*etherealness;* Price +3 bonus.

**Glamered:** A suit of armor with this ability appears normal. Upon
command, the armor changes shape and form to assume the appearance of a
normal set of clothing. The armor retains all its properties (including
weight) when glamered. Only a *true seeing* spell or similar magic
reveals the true nature of the armor when disguised.

Moderate illusion; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *disguise self;*
Price +2,700 gp.

**Invulnerability:** This suit of armor grants the wearer damage
reduction of 5/magic.

Strong abjuration and perhaps evocation (if *miracle* is used); CL 18th;
Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *stoneskin, wish* or *miracle;* Price +3
bonus.

**Reflecting:** This shield seems like a mirror. Its surface is
completely reflective. Once per day, it can be called on to reflect a
spell back at its caster exactly like the *spell turning* spell.

Strong abjuration; CL 14th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *spell turning;*
Price +5 bonus.

**Shadow:** This armor is jet black and blurs the wearer whenever she
tries to hide, granting a +5 competence bonus on Hide checks. (The
armor's armor check penalty still applies normally.)

Faint illusion; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *invisibility;*
Price +3,750 gp.

**Shadow, Improved:** As shadow, except it grants a +10 competence bonus
on Hide checks.

Moderate illusion; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *invisibility;*
Price +15,000 gp.

**Shadow, Greater:** As shadow, except it grants a +15 competence bonus
on Hide checks.

Moderate illusion; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *invisibility;*
Price +33,750 gp.

**Silent Moves:** This armor is well oiled and magically constructed so
that it not only makes little sound, but it dampens sound around it. It
provides a +5 competence bonus on its wearer's Move Silently checks.
(The armor's armor check penalty still applies normally.)

Faint illusion; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *silence;* Price
+3,750 gp.

**Silent Moves, Improved:** As silent moves, except it grants a +10
competence bonus on Move Silently checks.

Moderate illusion; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *silence;* Price
+15,000 gp.

**Silent Moves, Greater:** As silent moves, except it grants a +15
competence bonus on Move Silently checks.

Moderate illusion; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *silence;* Price
+33,750 gp.

**Slick:** Slick armor seems coated at all times with a slightly greasy
oil. It provides a +5 competence bonus on its wearer's Escape Artist
checks. (The armor's armor check penalty still applies normally.)

Faint conjuration; CL 4th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *grease;* Price
+3,750 gp.

**Slick, Improved:** As slick, except it grants a +10 competence bonus
on Escape Artist checks.

Moderate conjuration; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *grease;*
Price +15,000 gp.

**Slick, Greater:** As slick, except it grants a +15 competence bonus on
Escape Artist checks.

Moderate conjuration; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *grease;*
Price +33,750 gp.

**Sonic Resistance:** A suit of armor or a shield with this property
normally has a glistening appearance. The armor absorbs the first 10
points of sonic damage per attack that the wearer would normally take
(similar to the *resist energy* spell).

Faint abjuration; CL 3rd; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist energy;*
Price +18,000 gp.

**Sonic Resistance, Improved:** As sonic resistance, except it absorbs
the first 20 points of sonic damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +42,000 gp.

**Sonic Resistance, Greater:** As sonic resistance, except it absorbs
the first 30 points of sonic damage per attack.

Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *resist
energy;* Price +66,000 gp.

**Spell Resistance:** This property grants the armor's wearer spell
resistance while the armor is worn. The spell resistance can be 13, 15,
17, or 19, depending on the armor.

Strong abjuration; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *spell
resistance;* Price +2 bonus (SR 13), +3 bonus (SR 15), +4 bonus (SR 17),
or +5 bonus (SR 19).

**Undead Controlling:** The wearer of a suit of armor or a shield with
this property may control up to 26 HD of undead per day, as the *control
undead* spell. At dawn each day, the wearer loses control of any undead
still under his sway. Armor or a shield with this ability appears to be
made of bone; this feature is entirely decorative and has no other
effect on the armor.

Strong necromancy; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *control
undead*; Price +49,000 gp.

**Wild:** The wearer of a suit of armor or a shield with this ability
preserves his armor bonus (and any enhancement bonus) while in a wild
shape. Armor and shields with this ability usually appear to be made
covered in leaf patterns. While the wearer is in a wild shape, the armor
cannot be seen.

Moderate transmutation; CL 9th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *baleful
polymorph*; Price +3 bonus.

  --------- --------- --------- ----------------------------- --------------
  Minor     Medium    Major     Specific Armor                Market Price
  01--50    01--25    ---       Mithral shirt                 1,100 gp
  51--80    26--45    ---       Dragonhide plate              3,300 gp
  81--100   46--57    ---       Elven chain                   4,150 gp
  ---       58--67    ---       Rhino hide                    5,165 gp
  ---       68--82    01--10    Adamantine breastplate        10,200 gp
  ---       83--97    11--20    Dwarven plate                 16,500 gp
  ---       98--100   21--32    Banded mail of luck           18,900 gp
  ---       ---       33--50    Celestial armor               22,400 gp
  ---       ---       51--60    Plate armor of the deep       24,650 gp
  ---       ---       61--75    Breastplate of command        25,400 gp
  ---       ---       76--90    Mithral full plate of speed   26,500 gp
  ---       ---       91--100   Demon armor                   52,260 gp
  --------- --------- --------- ----------------------------- --------------

  : Table: Specific Armors

## Specific Armors

The following specific suits of armor usually are preconstructed with
exactly the qualities described here.

**Adamantine Breastplate:** This nonmagical breastplate is made of
adamantine, giving its wearer damage reduction of 2/--.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 10,200 gp.

**Banded Mail of Luck:** Ten 100-gp gems adorn this *+3 banded mail.*
Once per week, the armor allows its wearer to require that an attack
roll made against him be rerolled. He must take whatever consequences
come from the second roll. The wearer's player must decide whether to
have the attack roll rerolled before damage is rolled.

Strong enchantment; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *bless;* Price
18,900 gp; Cost 10,150 gp + 700 XP.

**Breastplate of Command:** This finely crafted *+2 breastplate*
radiates a powerful aura of magic. When worn, the armor bestows a
dignified and commanding aura upon its owner. The wearer gains a +2
competence bonus on all Charisma checks, including turning checks and
Charisma-based skill checks. The wearer also gains a +2 competence bonus
to his Leadership score. Friendly troops within 360 feet of the user
become braver than normal. Since the effect arises in great part from
the distinctiveness of the armor, the wearer cannot hide or conceal
herself in any way and still have the effect function.

Strong enchantment; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *mass charm
monster;* Price 25,400 gp; Cost 10,975 gp + 850 XP.

**Celestial Armor:** This bright silver or gold *+3 chainmail* is so
fine and light that it can be worn under normal clothing without
betraying its presence. It has a maximum Dexterity bonus of +8, an armor
check penalty of --2, and an arcane spell failure chance of 15%. It is
considered light armor, weighs 20 pounds, and it allows the wearer to
use *fly* on command (as the spell) once per day.

Faint transmutation \[good\]; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
creator must be good, *fly;* Price 22,400 gp; Cost 12,550 gp + 1,004 XP.

**Demon Armor:** This plate armor is fashioned to make the wearer appear
to be a demon. The helmet is shaped to look like a horned demon head,
and its wearer looks out of the open, tooth-filled mouth. This *+4 full
plate* allows the wearer to make claw attacks that deal 1d10 points of
damage, strike as +1 weapons, and afflict the target as if she had been
struck by a *contagion* spell (Fortitude DC 14 negates). Use of
*contagion* requires a normal melee attack with the claws. The "claws"
are built into the armor's vambraces and gauntlets.

The armor bestows one negative level on any nonevil creature wearing it.
This negative level persists as long as the armor is worn and disappears
when the armor is removed. The negative level never results in actual
level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including
*restoration* spells) while the armor is worn.

Strong necromancy \[evil\]; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*contagion;* Price 52,260 gp; Cost 26,130 gp + 2,090 XP.

**Dragonhide Plate:** This suit of full plate is made of dragonhide,
rather than metal, so druids can wear it. It is otherwise identical to
masterwork full plate.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 3,300 gp.

**Dwarven Plate:** This full plate is made of adamantine, giving its
wearer damage reduction of 3/--.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 16,500 gp.

**Elven Chain:** This extremely light chainmail is made of very fine
mithral links. Speed while wearing elven chain is 30 feet for Medium
creatures, or 20 feet for Small. The armor has an arcane spell failure
chance of 20%, a maximum Dexterity bonus of +4, and an armor check
penalty of --2. It is considered light armor and weighs 20 pounds.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 4,150 gp.

**Mithral Full Plate of Speed:** As a free action, the wearer of this
fine set of *+1 mithral full plate* can activate it, enabling her to act
as though affected by a *haste* spell for up to 10 rounds each day. The
duration of the *haste* effect need not be consecutive rounds.

Speed while wearing a suit of mithral full plate is 20 feet for Medium
creatures, or 15 feet for Small. The armor has an arcane spell failure
chance of 25%, a maximum Dexterity bonus of +3, and an armor check
penalty of --3. It is considered medium armor and weighs 25 pounds.

Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *haste*; Price
26,500 gp.

**Mithral Shirt:** This extremely light chain shirt is made of very fine
mithral links. Speed while wearing a mithral shirt is 30 feet for Medium
creatures, or 20 feet for Small. The armor has an arcane spell failure
chance of 10%, a maximum Dexterity bonus of +6, and no armor check
penalty. It is considered light armor and weighs 10 pounds.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 1,100 gp.

**Plate Armor of the Deep:** This *+1 full plate* is decorated with a
wave and fish motif. The wearer of *plate armor of the deep* is treated
as unarmored for purposes of Swim checks. The wearer can breathe
underwater and can converse with any creature with a language that
breathes water.

Moderate abjuration; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *freedom of
movement, water breathing, tongues;* Price 24,650 gp; Cost 17,150 gp +
600 XP.

**Rhino Hide:** This *+2 hide* armor is made from rhinoceros hide. In
addition to granting a +2 enhancement bonus to AC, it has a --1 armor
check penalty and deals an additional 2d6 points of damage on any
successful charge attack made by the wearer, including a mounted charge.

Moderate transmutation; CL 9th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *bull's
strength;* Price 5,165 gp; Cost 2,665 gp + 200 XP.

  --------- --------- --------- ---------------------- --------------
  Minor     Medium    Major     Specific Shield        Market Price
  01--30    01--20    ---       Darkwood buckler       205 gp
  31--80    21--45    ---       Darkwood shield        257 gp
  81--95    46--70    ---       Mithral heavy shield   1,020 gp
  96--100   71--85    01--20    Caster's shield        3,153 gp
  ---       86--90    21--40    Spined shield          5,580 gp
  ---       91--95    41--60    Lion's shield          9,170 gp
  ---       96--100   61--90    Winged shield          17,257 gp
  ---       ---       91--100   Absorbing shield       50,170 gp
  --------- --------- --------- ---------------------- --------------

  : Table: Specific Shields

### Specific Shields

The following specific shields usually are preconstructed with exactly
the qualities described here.

**Absorbing Shield:** This *+1 heavy steel shield* is flat black and
seems to absorb light. Once every two days, on command, it can
*disintegrate* an object that it touches, as the spell but requiring a
melee touch attack.

Strong transmutation; CL 17th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*disintegrate;* Price 50,170 gp; Cost 25,170 gp + 2,000 XP.

**Caster's Shield:** This *+1 light wooden shield* has a small leather
strip on the back on which a spellcaster can scribe a single spell as on
a scroll. A spell so scribed has only half the base raw material cost.
Experience point and component costs remain the same. The strip cannot
accommodate spells of higher than 3rd level. The strip is reusable.

A random *caster 's shield* has a 50% chance of having a single medium
scroll spell on it. The spell is divine (01--80 on d%) or arcane
(81--100).

A *caster's shield* has a 5% arcane spell failure chance.

Moderate abjuration; CL 6th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Scribe Scroll,
creator must be at least 6th level; Price 3,153 gp (plus the value of
the scroll spell if one is currently scribed); Cost 1,653 gp + 120 XP.

**Darkwood Buckler:** This nonmagical light wooden shield is made out of
darkwood. It has no enhancement bonus, but its construction material
makes it lighter than a normal wooden shield. It weighs 2-1/2 pounds and
has no armor check penalty.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 205 gp.

**Darkwood Shield:** This nonmagical heavy wooden shield is made out of
darkwood. It has no enhancement bonus, but its construction material
makes it lighter than a normal wooden shield.

It weighs 5 pounds and has no armor check penalty.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 257 gp.

**Lion's Shield:** This *+2 heavy steel shield* is fashioned to appear
to be a roaring lion's head. Three times per day as a free action, the
lion's head can be commanded to attack (independently of the shield
wearer), biting with the wielder's base attack bonus (including multiple
attacks, if the wielder has them) and dealing 2d6 points of damage. This
attack is in addition to any actions performed by the wielder.

Moderate conjuration; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *summon
nature's ally IV;* Price 9,170 gp; Cost 4,670 gp + 360 XP.

**Mithral Heavy Shield:** This heavy shield is made of mithral and thus
is much lighter than a standard steel shield. It has a 5% arcane spell
failure chance and no armor check penalty. It weighs 5 pounds.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 1,020 gp.

**Spined Shield:** This *+1 heavy steel shield* is covered in spines. It
acts as a normal spiked shield. On command up to three times per day,
the shield's wearer can fire one of the shield's spines. A fired spine
has a +1 enhancement bonus, a range increment of 120 feet, and deals
1d10 points of damage (19--20/x2). Fired spines regenerate each day.

Moderate evocation; CL 6th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *magic missile;*
Price 5,580 gp; Cost 2,740 gp + 223 XP.

**Winged Shield:** This round heavy wooden shield has a +3 enhancement
bonus. Small, feathered wings encircle the shield.

Once per day it can be commanded to *fly* (as the spell), carrying the
wielder. The shield can carry up to 133 pounds and move at 60 feet per
round, or up to 266 pounds and move at 40 feet per round.

Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *fly;* Price
17,257 gp; Cost 8,628 gp and 5 sp + 690 XP.

## Weapons

Magic weapons have enhancement bonuses ranging from +1 to +5. They apply
these bonuses to both attack and damage rolls when used in combat. All
magic weapons are also masterwork weapons, but their masterwork bonus on
attack rolls does not stack with their enhancement bonus on attack
rolls.

Weapons come in two basic categories: melee and ranged. Some of the
weapons listed as melee weapons can also be used as ranged weapons. In
this case, their enhancement bonus applies to either type of attack.

In addition to an enhancement bonus, weapons may have special abilities.
Special abilities count as additional bonuses for determining the market
value of the item, but do not modify attack or damage bonuses (except
where specifically noted). A single weapon cannot have a modified bonus
(enhancement bonus plus special ability bonus equivalents) higher than
+10. A weapon with a special ability must have at least a +1 enhancement
bonus.

A weapon or a kind of ammunition may be made of an unusual material.
Roll d%: 01--95 indicates that the item is of a standard sort, and
96--100 indicates that it is made of a special material.

**Caster Level for Weapons:** The caster level of a weapon with a
special ability is given in the item description. For an item with only
an enhancement bonus and no other abilities, the caster level is three
times the enhancement bonus. If an item has both an enhancement bonus
and a special ability, the higher of the two caster level requirements
must be met.

**Additional Damage Dice:** Some magic weapons deal additional dice of
damage. Unlike other modifiers to damage, additional dice of damage are
not multiplied when the attacker scores a critical hit.

**Ranged Weapons and Ammunition:** The enhancement bonus from a ranged
weapon does not stack with the enhancement bonus from ammunition. Only
the higher of the two enhancement bonuses applies.

Ammunition fired from a projectile weapon with an enhancement bonus of
+1 or higher is treated as a magic weapon for the purpose of overcoming
damage reduction. Similarly, ammunition fired from a projectile weapon
with an alignment gains the alignment of that projectile weapon (in
addition to any alignment it may already have).

**Magic Ammunition and Breakage:** When a magic arrow, crossbow bolt, or
sling bullet misses its target, there is a 50% chance it breaks or
otherwise is rendered useless. A magic arrow, bolt, or bullet that hits
is destroyed.

**Light Generation:** Fully 30% of magic weapons shed light equivalent
to a *light* spell (bright light in a 20-foot radius, shadowy light in a
40-foot radius). These glowing weapons are quite obviously magical. Such
a weapon can't be concealed when drawn, nor can its light be shut off.
Some of the specific weapons detailed below always or never glow, as
defined in their descriptions.

**Hardness and Hit Points:** An attacker cannot damage a magic weapon
that has an enhancement bonus unless his own weapon has at least as high
an enhancement bonus as the weapon or shield struck. Each +1 of
enhancement bonus also adds 1 to the weapon's or shield's hardness and
hit points.

**Activation:** Usually a character benefits from a magic weapon in the
same way a character benefits from a mundane weapon---by attacking with
it. If a weapon has a special ability that the user needs to activate
then the user usually needs to utter a command word (a standard action).

**Magic Weapons and Critical Hits:** Some weapon qualities and some
specific weapons have an extra effect on a critical hit. This special
effect functions against creatures not subject to critical hits, such as
undead, elementals, and constructs. When fighting against such
creatures, roll for critical hits as you would against humanoids or any
other creature subject to critical hits. On a successful critical roll,
apply the special effect, but do not multiply the weapon's regular
damage.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- ----------------------------------- ---------------
  Minor                                                                                                                            Medium    Major     Weapon Bonus                        Base Price^1^
  01--70                                                                                                                           01--10    ---       +1                                  2,000 gp
  71--85                                                                                                                           11--29    ---       +2                                  8,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              30--58    01--20    +3                                  18,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              59--62    21--38    +4                                  32,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              ---       39--49    +5                                  50,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              ---       ---       +6^2^                               72,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              ---       ---       +7^2^                               98,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              ---       ---       +8^2^                               128,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              ---       ---       +9^2^                               162,000 gp
  ---                                                                                                                              ---       ---       +10^2^                              200,000 gp
  86--90                                                                                                                           63--68    50--63    Specific weapon^3^                  ---
  91--100                                                                                                                          69--100   64--100   Special ability and roll again^4^   ---
  1 This price is for 50 arrows, crossbow bolts, or sling bullets.                                                                                                                         
  2 A weapon can't actually have a bonus higher than +5. Use these lines to determine price when special abilities are added in.                                                           
  3 See Table: Specific Weapons.                                                                                                                                                           
  4 See Table: Melee Weapon Special Abilities for melee weapons or Table: Ranged Weapon Special Abilities for ranged weapons.                                                              
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- ----------------------------------- ---------------

  : Table: Weapons

  --------- ----------------------
  d%        Weapon Type
  01--70    Common melee weapon
  71--80    Uncommon weapon
  81--100   Common ranged weapon
  --------- ----------------------

  : Table: Weapon Type Determination

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------- ----------------
  d%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Weapon            Weapon Cost^1^
  01--04                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dagger            +302 gp
  05--14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Greataxe          +320 gp
  15--24                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Greatsword        +350 gp
  25--28                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kama              +302 gp
  29--41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Longsword         +315 gp
  42--45                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mace, light       +305 gp
  46--50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mace, heavy       +312 gp
  51--54                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nunchaku          +302 gp
  55--57                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Quarterstaff^2^   +600 gp
  58--61                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rapier            +320 gp
  62--66                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Scimitar          +315 gp
  67--70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Shortspear        +302 gp
  71--74                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Siangham          +303 gp
  75--84                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sword, bastard    +335 gp
  85--89                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sword, short      +310 gp
  90--100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Waraxe, dwarven   +330 gp
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Weapons to determine total market price.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
  2 Masterwork double weapons incur double the masterwork cost to account for each head (+300 gp masterwork cost per head for a total of +600 gp). Double weapons have separate magical bonuses for their different heads. If randomly determined, the second head of a double weapon has the same enhancement bonus as the main head (01--50 on d%), doubling the cost of the bonus, or its enhancement bonus is one less (51--100 on d%) and it has no special abilities. All magic weapons are masterwork weapons.                     
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------- ----------------

  : Table: Common Melee Weapons

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------
  d%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Weapon                    Weapon Cost^1^
  01--03                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Axe, orc double^2^        +660 gp
  04--07                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Battleaxe                 +310 gp
  08--10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Chain, spiked             +325 gp
  11--12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Club                      +300 gp
  13--16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Crossbow, hand            +400 gp
  17--19                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Crossbow, repeating       +550 gp
  20--21                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dagger, punching          +302 gp
  22--23                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Falchion                  +375 gp
  24--26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Flail, dire^2^            +690 gp
  27--31                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Flail, heavy              +315 gp
  32--35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Flail, light              +308 gp
  36--37                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gauntlet                  +302 gp
  38--39                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gauntlet, spiked          +305 gp
  40--41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Glaive                    +308 gp
  42--43                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Greatclub                 +305 gp
  44--45                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Guisarme                  +309 gp
  46--48                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Halberd                   +310 gp
  49--51                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Spear                     +301 gp
  52--54                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hammer, gnome hooked^2^   +620 gp
  55--56                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hammer, light             +301 gp
  57--58                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Handaxe                   +306 gp
  59--61                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kukri                     +308 gp
  62--64                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lance                     +310 gp
  65--67                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Longspear                 +305 gp
  68--70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Morningstar               +308 gp
  71--72                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Net                       +320 gp
  73--74                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pick, heavy               +308 gp
  75--76                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pick, light               +304 gp
  77--78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ranseur                   +310 gp
  79--80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sap                       +301 gp
  81--82                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Scythe                    +318 gp
  83--84                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Shuriken                  +301 gp
  85--86                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sickle                    +306 gp
  87--89                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sword, two-bladed^2^      +700 gp
  90--91                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Trident                   +315 gp
  92--94                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Urgrosh, dwarven^2^       +650 gp
  95--97                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Warhammer                 +312 gp
  98--100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Whip                      +301 gp
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Weapons to determine total market price.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
  2 Masterwork double weapons incur double the masterwork cost to account for each head (+300 gp masterwork cost per head for a total of +600 gp). Double weapons have separate magical bonuses for their different heads. If randomly determined, the second head of a double weapon has the same enhancement bonus as the main head (01--50 on d%), doubling the cost of the bonus, or its enhancement bonus is one less (51--100) and it has no special abilities. All magic weapons are masterwork weapons.                             
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------

  : Table: Uncommon Weapons

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------ ---------------------- ----------------
  d%                                                                              Weapon                                                      Weapon Cost^1^
  01--10                                                                          Ammunition (roll again):                                    
                                                                                  01--50                               Arrows (50)            +350 gp
                                                                                  51--80                               Bolts, crossbow (50)   +350 gp
                                                                                  81--100                              Bullets, sling (50)    +350 gp
  11--15                                                                          Axe, throwing                                               +308 gp
  16--25                                                                          Crossbow, heavy                                             +350 gp
  26--35                                                                          Crossbow, light                                             +335 gp
  36--39                                                                          Dart                                                        +300 gp 5 sp
  40--41                                                                          Javelin                                                     +301 gp
  42--46                                                                          Shortbow                                                    +330 gp
  47--51                                                                          Shortbow, composite (+0 Str bonus)                          +375 gp
  52--56                                                                          Shortbow, composite (+1 Str bonus)                          +450 gp
  57--61                                                                          Shortbow, composite (+2 Str bonus)                          +525 gp
  62--65                                                                          Sling                                                       +300 gp
  66--75                                                                          Longbow                                                     +375 gp
  76--80                                                                          Longbow, composite                                          +400 gp
  81--85                                                                          Longbow, composite (+1 Str bonus)                           +500 gp
  86--90                                                                          Longbow, composite (+2 Str bonus)                           +600 gp
  91--95                                                                          Longbow, composite (+3 Str bonus)                           +700 gp
  96--100                                                                         Longbow, composite (+4 Str bonus)                           +800 gp
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Weapons to determine total market price.                                                               
  All magic weapons are masterwork weapons.                                                                                                   
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------ ---------------------- ----------------

  : Table: Common Ranged Weapons

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- --------------------- ------------------------
  Minor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Medium    Major     Special Ability       Base Price Modifier^1^
  01--10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    01--06    01--03    Bane                  +1 bonus
  11--17                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    07--12    ---       Defending             +1 bonus
  18--27                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13--19    04--06    Flaming               +1 bonus
  28--37                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20--26    07--09    Frost                 +1 bonus
  38--47                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27--33    10--12    Shock                 +1 bonus
  48--56                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    34--38    13--15    Ghost touch           +1 bonus
  57--67                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    39--44    ---       Keen^2^               +1 bonus
  68--71                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    45--48    16--19    Ki Focus              +1 bonus
  72--75                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    49--50    ---       Merciful              +1 bonus
  76--82                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    51--54    20--21    Mighty cleaving       +1 bonus
  83--87                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    55--59    22--24    Spell storing         +1 bonus
  88--91                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60--63    25--28    Throwing              +1 bonus
  92--95                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    64--65    29--32    Thundering            +1 bonus
  96--99                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    66--69    33--36    Vicious               +1 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70--72    37--41    Anarchic              +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       73--75    42--46    Axiomatic             +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       76--78    47--49    Disruption^3^         +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       79--81    50--54    Flaming burst         +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       82--84    55--59    Icy burst             +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       85--87    60--64    Holy                  +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       88--90    65--69    Shocking burst        +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       91--93    70--74    Unholy                +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       94--95    75--78    Wounding              +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ---       79--83    Speed                 +3 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ---       84--86    Brilliant energy      +4 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ---       87--88    Dancing               +4 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ---       89--90    Vorpal^2^             +5 bonus
  100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       96--100   91--100   Roll again twice^4^   ---
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Weapons to determine total market price.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  2 Piercing or slashing weapons only. Reroll if randomly generated for a bludgeoning weapon.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  3 Bludgeoning weapons only. Reroll if randomly generated for a piercing or slashing weapon.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  4 Reroll if you get a duplicate special ability, an ability incompatible with an ability that you've already rolled, or if the extra ability puts you over the +10 limit. A weapon's enhancement bonus and special ability bonus equivalents can't total more than +10.                                             
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- --------------------- ------------------------

  : Table: Melee Weapon Special Abilities

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- --------------------- ------------------------
  Minor                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Medium    Major     Special Ability       Base Price Modifier^1^
  01--12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    01--08    01--04    Bane                  +1 bonus
  13--25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    09--16    05--08    Distance              +1 bonus
  26--40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17--28    09--12    Flaming               +1 bonus
  41--55                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    29--40    13--16    Frost                 +1 bonus
  56--60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    41--42    ---       Merciful              +1 bonus
  61--68                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    43--47    17--21    Returning             +1 bonus
  69--83                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    48--59    22--25    Shock                 +1 bonus
  84--93                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    60--64    26--27    Seeking               +1 bonus
  94--99                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    65--68    28--29    Thundering            +1 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       69--71    30--34    Anarchic              +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       72--74    35--39    Axiomatic             +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75--79    40--49    Flaming burst         +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80--82    50--54    Holy                  +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       83--87    55--64    Icy burst             +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       88--92    65--74    Shocking burst        +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       93--95    75--79    Unholy                +2 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ---       80--84    Speed                 +3 bonus
  ---                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ---       85--90    Brilliant energy      +4 bonus
  100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       96--100   91--100   Roll again twice^2^   ---
  1 Add to enhancement bonus on Table: Weapons to determine total market price.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  2 Reroll if you get a duplicate special ability, an ability incompatible with an ability that you've already rolled, or if the extra ability puts you over the +10 limit. A weapon's enhancement bonus and special ability bonus equivalents can't total more than +10.                                             
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- --------- --------------------- ------------------------

  : Table: Ranged Weapon Special Abilities

**Weapons for Unusually Sized Creatures:** The cost of weapons for
creatures who are neither Small nor Medium varies. The cost of the
masterwork quality and any magical enhancement remains the same.

**Special Qualities:** Roll d%. If the item is a melee weapon, a 01--30
result indicates that the item sheds light, 31--45 indicates that
something (a design, inscription, or the like) provides a clue to the
weapon's function, and 46--100 indicates no special qualities.

If the item is a ranged weapon, a 01--15 result indicates that something
(a design, inscription, or the like) provides a clue to the weapon's
function, and 16--100 indicates no special qualities.

## Magic Weapon Special Ability Descriptions

In addition to enhancement bonuses, weapons can have one or more of the
special abilities detailed below. A weapon with a special ability must
have at least a +1 enhancement bonus.

**Anarchic:** An anarchic weapon is chaotically aligned and infused with
the power of chaos. It makes the weapon chaos-aligned and thus bypasses
the corresponding damage reduction. It deals an extra 2d6 points of
damage against all of lawful alignment. It bestows one negative level on
any lawful creature attempting to wield it. The negative level remains
as long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when the weapon is no
longer wielded. This negative level never results in actual level loss,
but it cannot be overcome in any way (including *restoration* spells)
while the weapon is wielded. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted
bestow the chaotic power upon their ammunition.

Moderate evocation \[chaotic\]; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*chaos hammer,* creator must be chaotic; Price +2 bonus.

**Axiomatic:** An axiomatic weapon is lawfully aligned and infused with
the power of law. It makes the weapon law-aligned and thus bypasses the
corresponding damage reduction. It deals an extra 2d6 points of damage
against all of chaotic alignment. It bestows one negative level on any
chaotic creature attempting to wield it. The negative level remains as
long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when the weapon is no
longer wielded. This negative level never results in actual level loss,
but it cannot be overcome in any way (including *restoration* spells)
while the weapon is wielded. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted
bestow the lawful power upon their ammunition.

Moderate evocation \[lawful\]; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*order's wrath,* creator must be lawful; Price +2 bonus.

**Bane:** A bane weapon excels at attacking one type or subtype of
creature. Against its designated foe, its effective enhancement bonus is
+2 better than its normal enhancement bonus. It deals an extra 2d6
points of damage against the foe. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted
bestow the bane quality upon their ammunition. To randomly determine a
weapon's designated foe, roll on the following table.

  --------- ----------------------
  d%        Designated Foe
  01--05    Aberrations
  06--09    Animals
  10--16    Constructs
  17--22    Dragons
  23--27    Elementals
  28--32    Fey
  33--39    Giants
  40        Humanoids, aquatic
  41--42    Humanoids, dwarf
  43--44    Humanoids, elf
  45        Humanoids, gnoll
  46        Humanoids, gnome
  47--49    Humanoids, goblinoid
  50        Humanoids, halfling
  51--54    Humanoids, human
  55--57    Humanoids, reptilian
  58--60    Humanoids, orc
  61--65    Magical beasts
  66--70    Monstrous humanoids
  71--72    Oozes
  73        Outsiders, air
  74--76    Outsiders, chaotic
  77        Outsiders, earth
  78--80    Outsiders, evil
  81        Outsiders, fire
  82--84    Outsiders, good
  85--87    Outsiders, lawful
  88        Outsiders, water
  89--90    Plants
  91--98    Undead
  99--100   Vermin
  --------- ----------------------

Moderate conjuration; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *summon
monster I*; Price +1 bonus.

**Brilliant Energy:** A brilliant energy weapon has its significant
portion transformed into light, although this does not modify the item's
weight. It always gives off light as a torch (20-foot radius). A
brilliant energy weapon ignores nonliving matter. Armor and shield
bonuses to AC (including any enhancement bonuses to that armor) do not
count against it because the weapon passes through armor. (Dexterity,
deflection, dodge, natural armor, and other such bonuses still apply.) A
brilliant energy weapon cannot harm undead, constructs, and objects.
This property can only be applied to melee weapons, thrown weapons, and
ammunition.

Strong transmutation; CL 16th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *gaseous
form, continual flame;* Price +4 bonus.

**Dancing:** As a standard action, a dancing weapon can be loosed to
attack on its own. It fights for 4 rounds using the base attack bonus of
the one who loosed it and then drops. While dancing, it cannot make
attacks of opportunity, and the person who activated it is not
considered armed with the weapon. In all other respects, it is
considered wielded or attended by the creature for all maneuvers and
effects that target items. While dancing, it takes up the same space as
the activating character and can attack adjacent foes (weapons with
reach can attack opponents up to 10 feet away). The dancing weapon
accompanies the person who activated it everywhere, whether she moves by
physical or magical means. If the wielder who loosed it has an
unoccupied hand, she can grasp it while it is attacking on its own as a
free action; when so retrieved the weapon can't dance (attack on its
own) again for 4 rounds.

Strong transmutation; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *animate
objects;* Price +4 bonus.

**Defending:** A defending weapon allows the wielder to transfer some or
all of the sword's enhancement bonus to his AC as a bonus that stacks
with all others. As a free action, the wielder chooses how to allocate
the weapon's enhancement bonus at the start of his turn before using the
weapon, and the effect to AC lasts until his next turn.

Moderate abjuration; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *shield* or
*shield of faith;* Price +1 bonus.

**Disruption:** A weapon of disruption is the bane of all undead. Any
undead creature struck in combat must succeed on a DC 14 Will save or be
destroyed. A weapon of disruption must be a bludgeoning weapon. (If you
roll this property randomly for a piercing or slashing weapon, reroll.)

Strong conjuration; CL 14th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *heal;* Price
+2 bonus.

**Distance:** This property can only be placed on a ranged weapon. A
weapon of distance has double the range increment of other weapons of
its kind.

Moderate divination; CL 6th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*clairaudience/clairvoyance;* Price +1 bonus.

**Flaming:** Upon command, a flaming weapon is sheathed in fire. The
fire does not harm the wielder. The effect remains until another command
is given. A flaming weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of fire damage on a
successful hit. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the fire
energy upon their ammunition.

Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor and *flame
blade, flame strike,* or *fireball;* Price +1 bonus.

**Flaming Burst:** A flaming burst weapon functions as a flaming weapon
that also explodes with flame upon striking a successful critical hit.
The fire does not harm the wielder. In addition to the extra fire damage
from the flaming ability (see above), a flaming burst weapon deals an
extra 1d10 points of fire damage on a successful critical hit. If the
weapon's critical multiplier is x3, add an extra 2d10 points of fire
damage instead, and if the multiplier is x4, add an extra 3d10 points of
fire damage. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the fire
energy upon their ammunition.

Even if the flaming ability is not active, the weapon still deals its
extra fire damage on a successful critical hit.

Strong evocation; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor and *flame blade,
flame strike,* or *fireball;* Price +2 bonus.

**Frost:** Upon command, a frost weapon is sheathed in icy cold. The
cold does not harm the wielder. The effect remains until another command
is given. A frost weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of cold damage on a
successful hit. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the cold
energy upon their ammunition.

Moderate evocation; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *chill metal* or
*ice storm;* Price +1 bonus.

**Ghost Touch:** A ghost touch weapon deals damage normally against
incorporeal creatures, regardless of its bonus. (An incorporeal
creature's 50% chance to avoid damage does not apply to attacks with
ghost touch weapons.) The weapon can be picked up and moved by an
incorporeal creature at any time. A manifesting ghost can wield the
weapon against corporeal foes. Essentially, a ghost touch weapon counts
as either corporeal or incorporeal at any given time, whichever is more
beneficial to the wielder.

Moderate conjuration; CL 9th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *plane shift;*
Price +1 bonus.

**Holy:** A holy weapon is imbued with holy power. This power makes the
weapon good-aligned and thus bypasses the corresponding damage
reduction. It deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against all of evil
alignment. It bestows one negative level on any evil creature attempting
to wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand
and disappears when the weapon is no longer wielded. This negative level
never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way
(including *restoration* spells) while the weapon is wielded. Bows,
crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the holy power upon their
ammunition.

Moderate evocation \[good\]; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *holy
smite,* creator must be good; Price +2 bonus.

**Icy Burst:** An icy burst weapon functions as a frost weapon that also
explodes with frost upon striking a successful critical hit. The frost
does not harm the wielder. In addition to the extra damage from the
frost ability, an icy burst weapon deals an extra 1d10 points of cold
damage on a successful critical hit. If the weapon's critical multiplier
is x3, add an extra 2d10 points of cold damage instead, and if the
multiplier is x4, add an extra 3d10 points. Bows, crossbows, and slings
so crafted bestow the cold energy upon their ammunition.

Even if the frost ability is not active, the weapon still deals its
extra cold damage on a successful critical hit.

Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *chill metal*
or *ice storm;* Price +2 bonus.

**Keen:** This ability doubles the threat range of a weapon. Only
piercing or slashing weapons can be keen. (If you roll this property
randomly for an inappropriate weapon, reroll.) This benefit doesn't
stack with any other effect that expands the threat range of a weapon
(such as the *keen edge* spell or the Improved Critical feat).

Moderate transmutation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *keen
edge;* Price +1 bonus.

***Ki* Focus:** The magic weapon serves as a channel for the wielder's
*ki*, allowing her to use her special *ki* attacks through the weapon as
if they were unarmed attacks. These attacks include the monk's stunning
attack, *ki* strike, and quivering palm, as well as the Stunning Fist
feat. Only melee weapons can have the *ki* focus ability.

Moderate transmutation; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, creator must
be a monk; Price +1 bonus.

**Merciful:** The weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage, and all
damage it deals is nonlethal damage. On command, the weapon suppresses
this ability until commanded to resume it. Bows, crossbows, and slings
so crafted bestow the merciful effect upon their ammunition.

Faint conjuration; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *cure light
wounds*; Price +1 bonus.

**Mighty Cleaving:** A mighty cleaving weapon allows a wielder with the
Cleave feat to make one additional cleave attempt in a round.

Moderate evocation; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *divine power;*
Price +1 bonus.

**Returning:** This special ability can only be placed on a weapon that
can be thrown. A returning weapon flies through the air back to the
creature that threw it. It returns to the thrower just before the
creature's next turn (and is therefore ready to use again in that turn).

Catching a returning weapon when it comes back is a free action. If the
character can't catch it, or if the character has moved since throwing
it, the weapon drops to the ground in the square from which it was
thrown.

Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*telekinesis;* Price +1 bonus.

**Seeking:** Only ranged weapons can have the seeking ability. The
weapon veers toward its target, negating any miss chances that would
otherwise apply, such as from concealment. (The wielder still has to aim
the weapon at the right square. Arrows mistakenly shot into an empty
space, for example, do not veer and hit invisible enemies, even if they
are nearby.)

Strong divination; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *true seeing*;
Price +1 bonus.

**Shock:** Upon command, a shock weapon is sheathed in crackling
electricity. The electricity does not harm the wielder. The effect
remains until another command is given. A shock weapon deals an extra
1d6 points of electricity damage on a successful hit. Bows, crossbows,
and slings so crafted bestow the electricity energy upon their
ammunition.

Moderate evocation; CL 8th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *call lightning*
or *lightning bolt;* Price +1 bonus.

**Shocking Burst:** A shocking burst weapon functions as a shock weapon
that also explodes with electricity upon striking a successful critical
hit. The electricity does not harm the wielder. In addition to the extra
electricity damage from the shock ability, a shocking burst weapon deals
an extra 1d10 points of electricity damage on a successful critical hit.
If the weapon's critical multiplier is x3, add an extra 2d10 points of
electricity damage instead, and if the multiplier is x4, add an extra
3d10 points. Bows, crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the
electricity energy upon their ammunition.

Even if the shock ability is not active, the weapon still deals its
extra electricity damage on a successful critical hit.

Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *call
lightning* or *lightning bolt;* Price +2 bonus.

**Speed:** When making a full attack action, the wielder of a speed
weapon may make one extra attack with it. The attack uses the wielder's
full base attack bonus, plus any modifiers appropriate to the situation.
(This benefit is not cumulative with similar effects, such as a *haste*
spell.)

Moderate transmutation; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *haste;*
Price +3 bonus.

**Spell Storing:** A spell storing weapon allows a spellcaster to store
a single targeted spell of up to 3rd level in the weapon. (The spell
must have a casting time of 1 standard action.) Any time the weapon
strikes a creature and the creature takes damage from it, the weapon can
immediately cast the spell on that creature as a free action if the
wielder desires. (This special ability is an exception to the general
rule that casting a spell from an item takes at least as long as casting
that spell normally.) Once the spell has been cast from the weapon, a
spellcaster can cast any other targeted spell of up to 3rd level into
it. The weapon magically imparts to the wielder the name of the spell
currently stored within it. A randomly rolled spell storing weapon has a
50% chance to have a spell stored in it already.

Strong evocation (plus aura of stored spell); CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms
and Armor, creator must be a caster of at least 12th level; Price +1
bonus.

**Thundering:** A thundering weapon creates a cacophonous roar like
thunder upon striking a successful critical hit. The sonic energy does
not harm the wielder. A thundering weapon deals an extra 1d8 points of
sonic damage on a successful critical hit. If the weapon's critical
multiplier is x3, add an extra 2d8 points of sonic damage instead, and
if the multiplier is x4, add an extra 3d8 points of sonic damage. Bows,
crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the sonic energy upon their
ammunition. Subjects dealt a critical hit by a thundering weapon must
make a DC 14 Fortitude save or be deafened permanently.

Faint necromancy; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*blindness/deafness;* Price +1 bonus.

**Throwing:** This ability can only be placed on a melee weapon. A melee
weapon crafted with this ability gains a range increment of 10 feet and
can be thrown by a wielder proficient in its normal use.

Faint transmutation; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *magic stone;*
Price +1 bonus.

**Unholy:** An unholy weapon is imbued with unholy power. This power
makes the weapon evil-aligned and thus bypasses the corresponding damage
reduction. It deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against all of good
alignment. It bestows one negative level on any good creature attempting
to wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand
and disappears when the weapon is no longer wielded. This negative level
never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way
(including *restoration* spells) while the weapon is wielded. Bows,
crossbows, and slings so crafted bestow the unholy power upon their
ammunition.

Moderate evocation \[evil\]; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *unholy
blight,* creator must be evil; Price +2 bonus.

**Vicious:** When a vicious weapon strikes an opponent, it creates a
flash of disruptive energy that resonates between the opponent and the
wielder. This energy deals an extra 2d6 points of damage to the opponent
and 1d6 points of damage to the wielder. Only melee weapons can be
vicious.

Moderate necromancy; CL 9th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *enervation*;
Price +1 bonus.

**Vorpal:** This potent and feared ability allows the weapon to sever
the heads of those it strikes. Upon a roll of natural 20 (followed by a
successful roll to confirm the critical hit), the weapon severs the
opponent's head (if it has one) from its body. Some creatures, such as
many aberrations and all oozes, have no heads. Others, such as golems
and undead creatures other than vampires, are not affected by the loss
of their heads. Most other creatures, however, die when their heads are
cut off. A vorpal weapon must be a slashing weapon. (If you roll this
property randomly for an inappropriate weapon, reroll.)

Strong necromancy and transmutation; CL 18th; Craft Magic Arms and
Armor, *circle of death*, *keen edge;* Price +5 bonus.

**Wounding:** A wounding weapon deals 1 point of Constitution damage
from blood loss when it hits a creature. A critical hit does not
multiply the Constitution damage. Creatures immune to critical hits
(such as plants and constructs) are immune to the Constitution damage
dealt by this weapon.

Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *mage's sword;*
Price +2 bonus.

  --------- --------- -------- --------------------------------- --------------
  Minor     Medium    Major    Specific Weapon                   Market Price
  01--15    ---       ---      Sleep arrow                       132 gp
  16--25    ---       ---      Screaming bolt                    267 gp
  26--45    ---       ---      Silver dagger, masterwork         322 gp
  46--65    ---       ---      Cold iron longsword, masterwork   330 gp
  66--75    01--09    ---      Javelin of lightning              1,500 gp
  76--80    10--15    ---      Slaying arrow                     2,282 gp
  81--90    16--24    ---      Adamantine dagger                 3,002 gp
  91--100   25--33    ---      Adamantine battleaxe              3,010 gp
  ---       34--37    ---      Slaying arrow (greater)           4,057 gp
  ---       38--40    ---      Shatterspike                      4,315 gp
  ---       41--46    ---      Dagger of venom                   8,302 gp
  ---       47--51    ---      Trident of warning                10,115 gp
  ---       52--57    01--04   Assassin's dagger                 10,302 gp
  ---       58--62    05--07   Shifter's sorrow                  12,780 gp
  ---       63--66    08--09   Trident of fish command           18,650 gp
  ---       67--74    10--13   Flame tongue                      20,715 gp
  ---       75--79    14--17   Luck blade (0 wishes)             22,060 gp
  ---       80--86    18--24   Sword of subtlety                 22,310 gp
  ---       87--91    25--31   Sword of the planes               22,315 gp
  ---       92--95    32--37   Nine lives stealer                23,057 gp
  ---       96--98    38--42   Sword of life stealing            25,715 gp
  ---       99--100   43--46   Oathbow                           25,600 gp
  ---       ---       47--51   Mace of terror                    38,552 gp
  ---       ---       52--57   Life-drinker                      40,320 gp
  ---       ---       58--62   Sylvan scimitar                   47,315 gp
  ---       ---       63--67   Rapier of puncturing              50,320 gp
  ---       ---       68--73   Sun blade                         50,335 gp
  ---       ---       74--79   Frost brand                       54,475 gp
  ---       ---       80--84   Dwarven thrower                   60,312 gp
  ---       ---       85--91   Luck blade (1 wish)               62,360 gp
  ---       ---       92--95   Mace of smiting                   75,312 gp
  ---       ---       96--97   Luck blade (2 wishes)             102,660 gp
  ---       ---       98--99   Holy avenger                      120,630 gp
  ---       ---       100      Luck blade (3 wishes)             142,960 gp
  --------- --------- -------- --------------------------------- --------------

  : Table: Specific Weapons

## Specific Weapons

The following specific weapons usually are preconstructed with exactly
the qualities described here.

**Adamantine Battleaxe:** This nonmagical axe is made out of adamantine.
As a masterwork weapon, it has a +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 3,010 gp.

**Adamantine Dagger:** This nonmagical dagger is made out of adamantine.
As a masterwork weapon, it has a +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 3,002 gp.

**Assassin's Dagger:** This wicked-looking, curved *+2 dagger* provides
a +1 bonus to the DC of a Fortitude save forced by the death attack of
an assassin.

Moderate necromancy; CL 9th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *slay living;*
Price 18,302 gp; Cost 9,302 gp + 720 XP.

**Dagger of Venom:** This black *+1 dagger* has a serrated edge. It
allows the wielder to use a *poison* effect (as the spell, save DC 14)
upon a creature struck by the blade once per day. The wielder can decide
to use the power after he has struck. Doing so is a free action, but the
*poison* effect must be invoked in the same round that the dagger
strikes.

Faint necromancy; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *poison;* Price
8,302 gp; Cost 4,302 gp + 320 XP.

**Dwarven Thrower:** This weapon commonly functions as a *+2 warhammer.*
In the hands of a dwarf, the warhammer gains an additional +1
enhancement bonus (for a total enhancement bonus of +3) and gains the
returning special ability. It can be hurled with a 30-foot range
increment. When hurled, it deals an extra 2d8 points of damage against
giants or an extra 1d8 points of damage against any other target.

Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, creator must be
a dwarf of at least 10th level; Price 60,312 gp; Cost 30,312 gp + 2,400
XP.

**Flame Tongue:** This is a *+1 flaming burst longsword.* Once per day,
the sword can blast forth a fiery ray at any target within 30 feet as a
ranged touch attack. The ray deals 4d6 points of fire damage on a
successful hit.

Moderate evocation; CL 12th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *scorching
ray,* and *flame blade, flame strike,* or *fireball;* Price 20,715 gp;
Cost 10,515 gp + 816 XP.

**Frost Brand:** This *+3 frost greatsword* sheds light as a torch when
the temperature drops below 0°F. At such times it cannot be concealed
when drawn, nor can its light be shut off. Its wielder is protected from
fire; the sword absorbs the first 10 points of fire damage each round
that the wielder would otherwise take.

A *frost brand* extinguishes all nonmagical fires in its area. As a
standard action, it can also dispel lasting fire spells, but not
instantaneous effects, though you must succeed on a dispel check (1d20
+14) against each spell to dispel it. The DC to dispel such spells is
11 + the caster level of the fire spell.

Strong evocation; CL 14th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *ice storm,
dispel magic, protection from energy;* Price 54,475 gp; Cost 27,375 gp
and 5 sp + 2179 XP.

**Holy Avenger:** This *+2 cold iron longsword* becomes a *+5 holy cold
iron longsword* in the hands of a paladin.

It provides spell resistance of 5 + the paladin's level to the wielder
and anyone adjacent to her. It also enables the wielder to use *greater
dispel magic* (once per round as a standard action) at the class level
of the paladin. (Only the area dispel is possible, not the targeted
dispel or counterspell versions of *greater dispel magic.*)

Strong abjuration; CL 18th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *holy aura,*
creator must be good; Price 120,630 gp; Cost 60,630 gp + 4,800 XP.

**Javelin of Lightning:** This javelin becomes a 5d6 *lightning bolt*
when thrown (Reflex DC 14 half ). It is consumed in the attack.

Faint evocation; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *lightning bolt;*
Price 1,500 gp; Cost 750 gp + 30 XP.

**Life-Drinker:** This *+1 greataxe* is favored by undead and
constructs, who do not suffer its drawback. A *life-drinker* bestows two
negative levels on its target whenever it deals damage, just as if its
target had been struck by an undead creature. One day after being
struck, subjects must make a DC 16 Fortitude save for each negative
level or lose a character level.

Each time a *life-drinker* deals damage to a foe, it also bestows one
negative level on the wielder. Any negative level gained by the wielder
in this fashion lasts for 1 hour.

Strong necromancy; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *enervation;*
Price 40,320 gp; Cost 20,320 gp + 1,600 XP.

**Luck Blade:** This *+2 short sword* gives its possessor a +1 luck
bonus on all saving throws. Its possessor also gains the power of good
fortune, usable once per day. This extraordinary ability allows its
possessor to reroll one roll that she just made. She must take the
result of the reroll, even if it's worse than the original roll. In
addition, a *luck blade* may contain up to three *wishes* (when randomly
rolled, a *luck blade* holds 1d4--1 *wishes,* minimum 0). When the last
*wish* is used, the sword remains a *+2 short sword,* still grants the
+1 luck bonus, and still grants its reroll power.

Strong evocation; CL 17th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *wish* or
*miracle;* Price 22,060 gp (0 *wishes*), 62,360 gp (1 *wish*), 102,660
gp (2 *wishes*), 142,960 gp (3 *wishes*); Cost 11,030 gp + 882 XP (0
*wishes*), 31,180 gp + 2,494 XP (1 *wish*); 51,330 gp + 4,106 XP (2
*wishes*), 71,480 gp + 5,718 XP (3 *wishes*).

**Mace of Smiting:** This *+3 adamantine heavy mace* has a +5
enhancement bonus against constructs, and any critical hit dealt to a
construct completely destroys it (no saving throw). A critical hit dealt
to an outsider deals x4 damage rather than x2.

Moderate transmutation; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor,
*disintegrate;* Price 75,312 gp; Cost 39,312 gp + 2,880 XP.

**Mace of Terror:** On command, this *+2 heavy mace* causes the
wielder's clothes and appearance to transform into an illusion of
darkest horror such that living creatures in a 30-foot cone become
panicked as if by a *fear* spell (Will DC 16 partial). They take a --2
morale penalty on saving throws, and they flee from the wielder. The
wielder may use this ability up to three times per day.

Strong necromancy; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *fear;* Price
38,552 gp; Cost 19,276 gp + 1,542 XP.

**Masterwork Cold Iron Longsword:** This nonmagical longsword is crafted
out of cold iron. As a masterwork weapon, it has a +1 enhancement bonus
on attack rolls.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 330 gp.

**Nine Lives Stealer:** This longsword always performs as a *+2
longsword,* but it also has the power to draw the life force from an
opponent. It can do this nine times before the ability is lost. At that
point, the sword becomes a simple *+2 longsword* (with a hint of evil
about it). A critical hit must be dealt for the sword's death-dealing
ability to function, and this weapon has no effect on creatures not
subject to critical hits. The victim is entitled to a DC 20 Fortitude
save to avoid death. If the save is successful, the sword's
death-dealing ability does not function, no use of the ability is
expended, and normal critical damage is determined. This sword is evil,
and any good character attempting to wield it gains two negative levels.
These negative levels remain as long as the sword is in hand and
disappear when the sword is no longer wielded. These negative levels
never result in actual level loss, but they cannot be overcome in any
way (including *restoration* spells) while the sword is wielded.

Strong necromancy \[evil\]; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *finger
of death;* Price 23,057 gp; Cost 11,528 gp 5 sp + 922 XP.

**Oathbow:** Of elven make, this white *+2 composite longbow* (+2 Str
bonus) whispers "Swift defeat to my enemies" in Elven when nocked and
pulled. Once per day, if the firer swears aloud to slay her target (a
free action), the bow's whisper becomes the low shout "Swift death to
those who have wronged me." Against such a sworn enemy, the bow has a +5
enhancement bonus, and arrows launched from it deal an additional 2d6
points of damage (and x4 on a critical hit instead of the normal x3).
However, the bow is treated as only a masterwork weapon against all foes
other than the sworn enemy, and the wielder takes a --1 penalty on
attack rolls with any weapon other than the *oathbow.* These bonuses and
penalties last for seven days or until the sworn enemy is slain or
destroyed by the wielder of the *oathbow,* whichever comes first.

The *oathbow* may only have one sworn enemy at a time. Once the wielder
swears to slay a target, he cannot make a new oath until he has slain
that target or seven days have passed. Even if the wielder slays the
sworn enemy on the same day that he makes the oath, he cannot activate
the *oathbow*'s special power again until 24 hours have passed from the
time he made the oath.

Strong evocation; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, creator must be
an elf; Price 25,600 gp; Cost 13,100 gp + 1,000 XP.

**Rapier of Puncturing:** Three times per day, this *+2 wounding rapier*
allows the wielder to make a touch attack with the weapon that deals 1d6
points of Constitution damage by draining blood. Creatures immune to
critical hits are immune to the Constitution damage dealt by this
weapon.

Strong necromancy; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *harm;* Price
50,320 gp; Cost 25,320 gp + 2,000 XP.

**Screaming Bolt:** One of these *+2 bolts* screams when fired, forcing
all enemies of the wielder within 20 feet of the path of the bolt to
succeed on a DC 14 Will save or become shaken. This is a mind-affecting
fear effect.

Faint enchantment; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *doom;* Price
267gp; Cost 128 gp and 5 sp + 10 XP.

**Shatterspike:** Wielders without the Improved Sunder feat use
*Shatterspike* as a *+1 longsword* only; wielders with the Improved
Sunder feat add a +4 bonus (including the sword's +1 enhancement bonus)
to the opposed roll when attempting to strike a foe's weapon. If
successful, *Shatterspike* deals 1d8+4 points of damage plus the
wielder's Strength modifier to the target weapon (the target weapon's
hardness must still be overcome with each hit). *Shatterspike* can
damage weapons with an enhancement bonus of +4 or lower.

Strong evocation; CL 13th; Str 13, Craft Arms and Armor, Power Attack,
Improved Sunder, *shatter*; Price 4,315 gp; Cost 2,315 gp + 160 XP;
Weight 4 lb.

**Shifter's Sorrow:** This *+1/+1 two-bladed sword* has blades of
alchemical silver. The weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage
against any creature with the shapechanger subtype. When a shapechanger
or a creature in an alternate form (such as a druid using wild shape) is
struck by the weapon, it must make a DC 15 Will save or return to its
natural form.

Strong transmutation; CL 15th; Craft Arms and Armor, *baleful
polymorph;* Price 12,780 gp; Cost 6,780 gp + 480 XP; Weight 10 lb.

**Silver Dagger, Masterwork:** This masterwork alchemical silver dagger
is nonmagical. As a masterwork weapon, it has a +1 enhancement bonus on
attack rolls.

No aura (nonmagical); Price 322 gp.

**Slaying Arrow:** This *+1 arrow* is keyed to a particular type or
subtype of creature. If it strikes such a creature, the target must make
a DC 20 Fortitude save or die (or, in the case of unliving targets, be
destroyed) instantly. Note that even creatures normally exempt from
Fortitude saves (undead and constructs) are subject to this attack. When
keyed to a living creature, this is a death effect (and thus *death
ward* protects a target). To determine the type or subtype of creature
the arrow is keyed to, roll on the table below.

A *greater slaying arrow* functions just like a normal *slaying arrow,*
but the DC to avoid the death effect is 23.

Strong necromancy; CL 13th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *finger of
death* (*slaying arrow*) or heightened *finger of death* (*greater
slaying arrow*); Price 2,282 gp (*slaying arrow*) or 4,057 gp (*greater
slaying arrow*); Cost 1,144 gp 5 sp + 91 XP (*slaying arrow*) or 2,032
gp + 162 XP (*greater slaying arrow*).

  --------- ----------------------------
  d%        Designated Type or Subtype
  01--05    Aberrations
  06--09    Animals
  10--16    Constructs
  17--22    Dragons
  23--27    Elementals
  28--32    Fey
  33--39    Giants
  40        Humanoids, aquatic
  41--42    Humanoids, dwarf
  43--44    Humanoids, elf
  45        Humanoids, gnoll
  46        Humanoids, gnome
  47--49    Humanoids, goblinoid
  50        Humanoids, halfling
  51--54    Humanoids, human
  55--57    Humanoids, reptilian
  58--60    Humanoids, orc
  61--65    Magical beasts
  66--70    Monstrous humanoids
  71--72    Oozes
  73        Outsiders, air
  74--76    Outsiders, chaotic
  77        Outsiders, earth
  78--80    Outsiders, evil
  81        Outsiders, fire
  82--84    Outsiders, good
  85--87    Outsiders, lawful
  88        Outsiders, water
  89--90    Plants
  91--98    Undead
  99--100   Vermin
  --------- ----------------------------

**Sleep Arrow:** This *+1 arrow* is painted white and has white
fletching. If it strikes a foe so that it would normally deal damage, it
instead bursts into magical energy that deals nonlethal damage (in the
same amount as would be lethal damage) and forces the target to make a
DC 11 Will save or fall asleep.

Faint enchantment; CL 5th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *sleep;* Price
132 gp; Cost 69 gp 5 sp + 5 XP.

**Sun Blade:** This sword is the size of a bastard sword. However, a
*sun blade* is wielded as if it were a short sword with respect to
weight and ease of use. (In other words, the weapon appears to all
viewers to be a bastard sword, and deals bastard sword damage, but the
wielder feels and reacts as if the weapon were a short sword.) Any
individual able to use either a bastard sword or a short sword with
proficiency is proficient in the use of a *sun blade.* Likewise, Weapon
Focus and Weapon Specialization in short sword and bastard sword apply
equally, but the benefits of those feats do not stack.

In normal combat, the glowing golden blade of the weapon is equal to a
*+2 bastard sword.* Against evil creatures, its enhancement bonus is +4.
Against Negative Energy Plane creatures or undead creatures, the sword
deals double damage (and x3 on a critical hit instead of the usual x2).

The blade also has a special *sunlight* power. Once per day, the wielder
can swing the blade vigorously above her head while speaking a command
word. The *sunblade* then sheds a bright yellow radiance that is like
full daylight. The radiance begins shining in a 10-foot radius around
the sword wielder and extends outward at 5 feet per round for 10 rounds
thereafter, to create a globe of light with a 60-foot radius. When the
wielder stops swinging, the radiance fades to a dim glow that persists
for another minute before disappearing entirely. All *sun blades* are of
good alignment, and any evil creature attempting to wield one gains one
negative level. The negative level remains as long as the sword is in
hand and disappears when the sword is no longer wielded. This negative
level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in
any way (including *restoration* spells) while the sword is wielded.

Moderate evocation; CL 10th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *daylight,*
creator must be good; Price 50,335 gp; Cost 25,335 gp + 2,000 XP.

**Sword of Life Stealing:** This black iron *+2 longsword* bestows a
negative level when it deals a critical hit. The sword wielder gains 1d6
temporary hit points each time a negative level is bestowed on another.
These temporary hit points last for 24 hours. One day after being
struck, subjects must make a DC 16 Fortitude save for each negative
level or lose a character level.

Strong necromancy; CL 17th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *enervation;*
Price 25,715 gp; Cost 12,857 gp and 5 sp + 1,029 XP.

**Sword of the Planes:** This longsword has an enhancement bonus of +1
on the Material Plane, but on any Elemental Plane its enhancement bonus
increases to +2. (The +2 enhancement bonus also applies on the Material
Plane when the weapon is used against elementals.) It operates as a *+3
longsword* on the Astral Plane or the Ethereal Plane or when used
against opponents native to either of those planes. On any other plane,
or against any outsider, it functions as a *+4 longsword.*

Strong evocation; CL 15th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *plane shift;*
Price 22,315 gp; Cost 11,157 gp and 5 sp + 893 XP.

**Sword of Subtlety:** A *+1 short sword* with a thin, dull gray blade,
this weapon provides a +4 bonus on its wielder's attack and damage rolls
when he is making a sneak attack with it.

Moderate illusion; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *blur;* Price
22,310 gp; Cost 11,155 gp + 892 XP.

**Sylvan Scimitar:** This *+3 scimitar,* when used outdoors in a
temperate climate, grants its wielder the use of the Cleave feat and
deals an extra 1d6 points of damage.

Moderate evocation; CL 11th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *divine power*
or creator must be a 7th-level druid; Price 47,315gp; Cost 23,657 gp and
5 sp + 1,893 XP.

**Trident of Fish Command:** The magical properties of this *+1 trident*
with a 6-foot-long haft enable its wielder to *charm* up to 14 HD of
aquatic animals (Will DC 16 negates, animals get a +5 bonus if currently
under attack by the wielder or his allies), no two of which can be more
than 30 feet apart. The wielder can use this effect up to three times
per day. The wielder can communicate with the animals as if using a
*speak with animals* spell. Animals making their saving throw are free
of control, but they will not approach within 10 feet of the trident.
The trident can be used up to three times per day.

Moderate enchantment; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *speak with
animals;* Price 18,650 gp; Cost 9,325 gp + 746 XP.

**Trident of Warning:** A weapon of this type enables its wielder to
determine the location, depth, kind, and number of aquatic predators
within 680 feet. A *trident of warning* must be grasped and pointed in
order for the character using it to gain such information, and it
requires 1 round to scan a hemisphere with a radius of 680 feet. The
weapon is otherwise a *+2 trident.*

Moderate divination; CL 7th; Craft Magic Arms and Armor, *locate
creature;* Price 10,115 gp; Cost 5,057 gp and 5 sp + 405 XP.
