---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Basic Rules and Legal / Skills I
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# SKILLS I

## Table of Contents

-   [[#Skills Summary]]
-   [[#Using Skills]]
    -   [[#Skill Checks]]
        -   [[#Difficulty Class]]
        -   [[#Opposed Checks]]
        -   [[#Trying Again]]
        -   [[#Untrained Skill Checks]]
        -   [[#Favorable and Unfavorable Conditions]]
        -   [[#Time and Skill Checks]]
        -   [[#Checks Without Rolls]]
    -   [[#Combining Skill Attempts]]
        -   [[#Individual Events]]
        -   [[#Aid Another]]
        -   [[#Skill Synergy]]
    -   [[#Ability Checks]]
-   [[#Skill Descriptions]]
    -   [[#Skill Name]]
    -   [[#Appraise ]]
    -   [[#Balance ]]
    -   [[#Bluff ]]
    -   [[#Climb ]]
    -   [[#Concentration ]]
    -   [[#Craft ]]
    -   [[#Decipher Script ]]
    -   [[#Diplomacy ]]
        -   [[#Influencing Npc Attitudes]]
    -   [[#Disable Device ]]
        -   [[#Other Ways to Beat a Trap]]
    -   [[#Disguise ]]
    -   [[#Escape Artist ]]
    -   [[#Forgery ]]
    -   [[#Gather Information ]]
    -   [[#Handle Animal ]]
    -   [[#Heal ]]
    -   [[#Hide ]]
    -   [[#Intimidate ]]
    -   [[#Jump ]]
    -   [[#Knowledge ]]
    -   [[#Listen ]]
    -   [[#Move Silently ]]
    -   [[#Open Lock ]]
    -   [[#Perform ]]
    -   [[#Profession ]]
    -   [[#Ride ]]
    -   [[#Search ]]
    -   [[#Sense Motive ]]
    -   [[#Sleight of Hand ]]
    -   [[#Speak Language ]]
    -   [[#Spellcraft ]]
    -   [[#Spot ]]
    -   [[#Survival ]]
    -   [[#Swim ]]
    -   [[#Tumble ]]
    -   [[#Use Magic Device ]]
    -   [[#Use Rope ]]

## Skills Summary

If you buy a class skill, your character gets 1 rank (equal to a +1
bonus on checks with that skill) for each skill point. If you buy other
classes' skills (cross-class skills), you get 1/2 rank per skill point.

Your maximum rank in a class skill is your character level + 3.

Your maximum rank in a cross-class skill is one-half of this number (do
not round up or down).

**Using Skills:** To make a skill check, roll: 1d20 + skill modifier
(Skill modifier = skill rank + ability modifier + miscellaneous
modifiers)

This roll works just like an attack roll or a saving throw--- the higher
the roll, the better. Either you're trying to match or exceed a certain
Difficulty Class (DC), or you're trying to beat another character's
check result.

**Skill Ranks:** A character's number of ranks in a skill is based on
how many skill points a character has invested in a skill. Many skills
can be used even if the character has no ranks in them; doing this is
called making an untrained skill check.

**Ability Modifier:** The ability modifier used in a skill check is the
modifier for the skill's key ability (the ability associated with the
skill's use). The key ability of each skill is noted in its description.

**Miscellaneous Modifiers:** Miscellaneous modifiers include racial
bonuses, armor check penalties, and bonuses provided by feats, among
others.

Each skill point you spend on a class skill gets you 1 rank in that
skill. Class skills are the skills found on your character's class skill
list. Each skill point you spend on a cross-class skill gets your
character 1/2 rank in that skill. Cross-class skills are skills not
found on your character's class skill list. (Half ranks do not improve
your skill check, but two 1/2 ranks make 1 rank.) You can't save skill
points to spend later.

The maximum rank in a class skill is the character's level + 3. If it's
a cross-class skill, the maximum rank is half of that number (do not
round up or down).

Regardless of whether a skill is purchased as a class skill or a
cross-class skill, if it is a class skill for any of your classes, your
maximum rank equals your total character level + 3.

## Using Skills {#skills-summary--using-skills}

When your character uses a skill, you make a skill check to see how well
he or she does. The higher the result of the skill check, the better.
Based on the circumstances, your result must match or beat a particular
number (a DC or the result of an opposed skill check) for the check to
be successful. The harder the task, the higher the number you need to
roll.

Circumstances can affect your check. A character who is free to work
without distractions can make a careful attempt and avoid simple
mistakes. A character who has lots of time can try over and over again,
thereby assuring the best outcome. If others help, the character may
succeed where otherwise he or she would fail.

### Skill Checks

A skill check takes into account a character's training (skill rank),
natural talent (ability modifier), and luck (the die roll). It may also
take into account his or her race's knack for doing certain things
(racial bonus) or what armor he or she is wearing (armor check penalty),
or a certain feat the character possesses, among other things.

To make a skill check, roll 1d20 and add your character's skill modifier
for that skill. The skill modifier incorporates the character's ranks in
that skill and the ability modifier for that skill's key ability, plus
any other miscellaneous modifiers that may apply, including racial
bonuses and armor check penalties. The higher the result, the better.
Unlike with attack rolls and saving throws, a natural roll of 20 on the
d20 is not an automatic success, and a natural roll of 1 is not an
automatic failure.

#### Difficulty Class

Some checks are made against a Difficulty Class (DC). The DC is a number
(set using the skill rules as a guideline) that you must score as a
result on your skill check in order to succeed.


**Table: Difficulty Class Examples**

| **Difficulty (DC)**    | **Example (Skill Used)**                                                       |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Very easy (0)          | Notice something large in plain sight (Spot)                                   |
| Easy (5)               | Climb a knotted rope (Climb)                                                   |
| Average (10)           | Hear an approaching guard (Listen)                                             |
| Tough (15)             | Rig a wagon wheel to fall off (Disable Device)                                 |
| Challenging (20)       | Swim in stormy water (Swim)                                                    |
| Formidable (25)        | Open an average lock (Open Lock)                                               |
| Heroic (30)            | Leap across a 30-foot chasm (Jump)                                             |
| Nearly impossible (40) | Track a squad of orcs across hard ground after 24 hours of rainfall (Survival) |


#### Opposed Checks

An opposed check is a check whose success or failure is determined by
comparing the check result to another character's check result. In an
opposed check, the higher result succeeds, while the lower result fails.
In case of a tie, the higher skill modifier wins. If these scores are
the same, roll again to break the tie.


**Table: Example Opposed Checks**

| **Task**                   | **Skill (Key Ability)** | **Opposing Skill (Key Ability)** |
| -------------------------- | ----------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| Con someone                | Bluff (Cha)             | Sense Motive (Wis)               |
| Pretend to be someone else | Disguise (Cha)          | Spot (Wis)                       |
| Create a false map         | Forgery (Int)           | Forgery (Int)                    |
| Hide from someone          | Hide (Dex)              | Spot (Wis)                       |
| Make a bully back down     | Intimidate (Cha)        | Special1                         |
| Sneak up on someone        | Move Silently (Dex)     | Listen (Wis)                     |
| Steal a coin pouch         | Sleight of Hand (Dex)   | Spot (Wis)                       |
| Tie a prisoner securely    | Use Rope (Dex)          | Escape Artist (Dex)              |
1 An Intimidate check is opposed by the target’s level check, not a skill check. See the Intimidate skill description for more information

#### Trying Again

In general, you can try a skill check again if you fail, and you can
keep trying indefinitely. Some skills, however, have consequences of
failure that must be taken into account. A few skills are virtually
useless once a check has failed on an attempt to accomplish a particular
task. For most skills, when a character has succeeded once at a given
task, additional successes are meaningless.

#### Untrained Skill Checks

Generally, if your character attempts to use a skill he or she does not
possess, you make a skill check as normal. The skill modifier doesn't
have a skill rank added in because the character has no ranks in the
skill. Any other applicable modifiers, such as the modifier for the
skill's key ability, are applied to the check.

Many skills can be used only by someone who is trained in them.

#### Favorable and Unfavorable Conditions

Some situations may make a skill easier or harder to use, resulting in a
bonus or penalty to the skill modifier for a skill check or a change to
the DC of the skill check.

The chance of success can be altered in four ways to take into account
exceptional circumstances.

1\. Give the skill user a +2 circumstance bonus to represent conditions
that improve performance, such as having the perfect tool for the job,
getting help from another character (see Combining Skill Attempts), or
possessing unusually accurate information.

2\. Give the skill user a --2 circumstance penalty to represent
conditions that hamper performance, such as being forced to use
improvised tools or having misleading information.

3\. Reduce the DC by 2 to represent circumstances that make the task
easier, such as having a friendly audience or doing work that can be
subpar.

4\. Increase the DC by 2 to represent circumstances that make the task
harder, such as having an uncooperative audience or doing work that must
be flawless.

Conditions that affect your character's ability to perform the skill
change the skill modifier. Conditions that modify how well the character
has to perform the skill to succeed change the DC. A bonus to the skill
modifier and a reduction in the check's DC have the same result: They
create a better chance of success. But they represent different
circumstances, and sometimes that difference is important.

#### Time and Skill Checks

Using a skill might take a round, take no time, or take several rounds
or even longer. Most skill uses are standard actions, move actions, or
full-round actions. Types of actions define how long activities take to
perform within the framework of a combat round (6 seconds) and how
movement is treated with respect to the activity. Some skill checks are
instant and represent reactions to an event, or are included as part of
an action.

These skill checks are not actions. Other skill checks represent part of
movement.

#### Checks Without Rolls

A skill check represents an attempt to accomplish some goal, usually
while under some sort of time pressure or distraction. Sometimes,
though, a character can use a skill under more favorable conditions and
eliminate the luck factor.

**Taking 10:** When your character is not being threatened or
distracted, you may choose to take 10. Instead of rolling 1d20 for the
skill check, calculate your result as if you had rolled a 10. For many
routine tasks, taking 10 makes them automatically successful.
Distractions or threats (such as combat) make it impossible for a
character to take 10. In most cases, taking 10 is purely a safety
measure ---you know (or expect) that an average roll will succeed but
fear that a poor roll might fail, so you elect to settle for the average
roll (a 10). Taking 10 is especially useful in situations where a
particularly high roll wouldn't help.

**Taking 20:**When you have plenty of time (generally 2 minutes for a
skill that can normally be checked in 1 round, one full-round action, or
one standard action), you are faced with no threats or distractions, and
the skill being attempted carries no penalties for failure, you can take
20. In other words, eventually you will get a 20 on 1d20 if you roll
enough times. Instead of rolling 1d20 for the skill check, just
calculate your result as if you had rolled a 20.

Taking 20 means you are trying until you get it right, and it assumes
that you fail many times before succeeding. Taking 20 takes twenty times
as long as making a single check would take.

Since taking 20 assumes that the character will fail many times before
succeeding, if you did attempt to take 20 on a skill that carries
penalties for failure, your character would automatically incur those
penalties before he or she could complete the task. Common "take 20"
skills include Escape Artist, Open Lock, and Search.

**Ability Checks and Caster Level Checks:** The normal take 10 and take
20 rules apply for ability checks. Neither rule applies to caster level
checks.

### Combining Skill Attempts

When more than one character tries the same skill at the same time and
for the same purpose, their efforts may overlap.

#### Individual Events

Often, several characters attempt some action and each succeeds or fails
independently. The result of one character's Climb check does not
influence the results of other characters Climb check.

#### Aid Another

You can help another character achieve success on his or her skill check
by making the same kind of skill check in a cooperative effort. If you
roll a 10 or higher on your check, the character you are helping gets a
+2 bonus to his or her check, as per the rule for favorable conditions.
(You can't take 10 on a skill check to aid another.) In many cases, a
character's help won't be beneficial, or only a limited number of
characters can help at once.

In cases where the skill restricts who can achieve certain results you
can't aid another to grant a bonus to a task that your character
couldn't achieve alone.

#### Skill Synergy

It's possible for a character to have two skills that work well
together. In general, having 5 or more ranks in one skill gives the
character a +2 bonus on skill checks with each of its synergistic
skills, as noted in the skill description. In some cases, this bonus
applies only to specific uses of the skill in question, and not to all
checks. Some skills provide benefits on other checks made by a
character, such as those checks required to use certain class features.

### Ability Checks

Sometimes a character tries to do something to which no specific skill
really applies. In these cases, you make an ability check. An ability
check is a roll of 1d20 plus the appropriate ability modifier.
Essentially, you're making an untrained skill check.

In some cases, an action is a straight test of one's ability with no
luck involved. Just as you wouldn't make a height check to see who is
taller, you don't make a Strength check to see who is stronger.

## Skill Descriptions

This section describes each skill, including common uses and typical
modifiers. Characters can sometimes use skills for purposes other than
those noted here.

Here is the format for skill descriptions.

### Skill Name

The skill name line includes (in addition to the name of the skill) the
following information.

**Key Ability:** The abbreviation of the ability whose modifier applies
to the skill check. *Exception:* Speak Language has "None" as its key
ability because the use of this skill does not require a check.

**Trained Only:** If this notation is included in the skill name line,
you must have at least 1 rank in the skill to use it. If it is omitted,
the skill can be used untrained (with a rank of 0). If any special notes
apply to trained or untrained use, they are covered in the Untrained
section (see below).

**Armor Check Penalty:** If this notation is included in the skill name
line, an armor check penalty applies (when appropriate) to checks using
this skill. If this entry is absent, an armor check penalty does not
apply.

The skill name line is followed by a general description of what using
the skill represents. After the description are a few other types of
information:

**Check:** What a character ("you" in the skill description) can do with
a successful skill check and the check's DC.

**Action:** The type of action using the skill requires, or the amount
of time required for a check.

**Try Again:** Any conditions that apply to successive attempts to use
the skill successfully. If the skill doesn't allow you to attempt the
same task more than once, or if failure carries an inherent penalty
(such as with the Climb skill), you can't take 20. If this paragraph is
omitted, the skill can be retried without any inherent penalty, other
than the additional time required.

**Special:** Any extra facts that apply to the skill, such as special
effects deriving from its use or bonuses that certain characters receive
because of class, feat choices, or race.

**Synergy:** Some skills grant a bonus to the use of one or more other
skills because of a synergistic effect. This entry, when present,
indicates what bonuses this skill may grant or receive because of such
synergies. See Table 4--5 for a complete list of bonuses granted by
synergy between skills (or between a skill and a class feature).

**Restriction:** The full utility of certain skills is restricted to
characters of certain classes or characters who possess certain feats.
This entry indicates whether any such restrictions exist for the skill.

**Untrained:** This entry indicates what a character without at least 1
rank in the skill can do with it. If this entry doesn't appear, it means
that the skill functions normally for untrained characters (if it can be
used untrained) or that an untrained character can't attempt checks with
this skill (for skills that are designated as "Trained Only").

### Appraise 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int))***

**Check:** You can appraise common or well-known objects with a DC 12
Appraise check. Failure means that you estimate the value at 50% to 150%
(2d6+3 times 10%,) of its actual value.

Appraising a rare or exotic item requires a successful check against DC
15, 20, or higher. If the check is successful, you estimate the value
correctly; failure means you cannot estimate the item's value.

A magnifying glass gives you a +2 circumstance bonus on Appraise checks
involving any item that is small or highly detailed, such as a gem. A
merchant's scale gives you a +2 circumstance bonus on Appraise checks
involving any items that are valued by weight, including anything made
of precious metals.

These bonuses stack.

**Action:** Appraising an item takes 1 minute (ten consecutive
full-round actions).

**Try Again:** No. You cannot try again on the same object, regardless
of success.

**Special:** A dwarf gets a +2 racial bonus on Appraise checks that are
related to stone or metal items because dwarves are familiar with
valuable items of all kinds (especially those made of stone or metal).

The master of a raven familiar gains a +3 bonus on Appraise checks.

A character with the Diligent feat gets a +2 bonus on Appraise checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 ranks in any Craft skill, you gain a +2 bonus
on Appraise checks related to items made with that Craft skill.

**Untrained:** For common items, failure on an untrained check means no
estimate. For rare items, success means an estimate of 50% to 150%
(2d6+3 times 10%).

### Balance 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** You can walk on a precarious surface. A successful check lets
you move at half your speed along the surface for 1 round. A failure by
4 or less means you can't move for 1 round. A failure by 5 or more means
you fall. The difficulty varies with the surface, as follows:


| **Narrow Surface**      | **Balance DC** **1** | **Difficult Surface**  | **Balance DC** **1** |
| ----------------------- | -------------------- | ---------------------- | -------------------- |
| 7–12 inches wide        | 10                   | Uneven flagstone       | 10 **2**             |
| 2–6 inches wide         | 15                   | Hewn stone floor       | 10 **2**             |
| Less than 2 inches wide | 20                   | Sloped or angled floor | 10 **2**             |


**Narrow Surface Modifiers **

|Surface|DC Modifier<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|---|---|
|Surface|DC Modifier<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|Lightly obstructed|+2|
|Severely obstructed|+5|
|Lightly slippery|+2|
|Severely slippery|+5|
|Sloped or angled|+2|
|1 Add the appropriate modifier to the Balance DC of a narrow surface.|
|These modifiers stack.|

*Being Attacked while Balancing:* You are considered flat-footed while
balancing, since you can't move to avoid a blow, and thus you lose your
Dexterity bonus to AC (if any). If you have 5 or more ranks in Balance,
you aren't considered flat-footed while balancing. If you take damage
while balancing, you must make another Balance check against the same DC
to remain standing.

*Accelerated Movement:* You can try to walk across a precarious surface
more quickly than normal. If you accept a --5 penalty, you can move your
full speed as a move action. (Moving twice your speed in a round
requires two Balance checks, one for each move action used.) You may
also accept this penalty in order to charge across a precarious surface;
charging requires one Balance check for each multiple of your speed (or
fraction thereof ) that you charge.

**Action:** None. A Balance check doesn't require an action; it is made
as part of another action or as a reaction to a situation.

**Special:** If you have the Agile feat, you get a +2 bonus on Balance
checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you get a +2 bonus
on Balance checks.

### Bluff 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha))***

**Check:** A Bluff check is opposed by the target's Sense Motive check.
See the accompanying table for examples of different kinds of bluffs and
the modifier to the target's Sense Motive check for each one.

Favorable and unfavorable circumstances weigh heavily on the outcome of
a bluff. Two circumstances can weigh against you: The bluff is hard to
believe, or the action that the target is asked to take goes against its
self-interest, nature, personality, orders, or the like. If it's
important, you can distinguish between a bluff that fails because the
target doesn't believe it and one that fails because it just asks too
much of the target. For instance, if the target gets a +10 bonus on its
Sense Motive check because the bluff demands something risky, and the
Sense Motive check succeeds by 10 or less, then the target didn't so
much see through the bluff as prove reluctant to go along with it. A
target that succeeds by 11 or more has seen through the bluff.

A successful Bluff check indicates that the target reacts as you wish,
at least for a short time (usually 1 round or less) or believes
something that you want it to believe. Bluff, however, is not a
*suggestion* spell.

A bluff requires interaction between you and the target. Creatures
unaware of you cannot be bluffed.

*Feinting in Combat:* You can also use Bluff to mislead an opponent in
melee combat (so that it can't dodge your next attack effectively). To
feint, make a Bluff check opposed by your target's Sense Motive check,
but in this case, the target may add its base attack bonus to the roll
along with any other applicable modifiers.

If your Bluff check result exceeds this special Sense Motive check
result, your target is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC (if any) for the
next melee attack you make against it. This attack must be made on or
before your next turn.

Feinting in this way against a nonhumanoid is difficult because it's
harder to read a strange creature's body language; you take a --4
penalty on your Bluff check. Against a creature of animal Intelligence
(1 or 2) it's even harder; you take a --8 penalty. Against a
nonintelligent creature, it's impossible.

Feinting in combat does not provoke an attack of opportunity.

*Creating a Diversion to Hide:* You can use the Bluff skill to help you
hide. A successful Bluff check gives you the momentary diversion you
need to attempt a Hide check while people are aware of you. This usage
does not provoke an attack of opportunity.

*Delivering a Secret Message:* You can use Bluff to get a message across
to another character without others understanding it. The DC is 15 for
simple messages, or 20 for complex messages, especially those that rely
on getting across new information. Failure by 4 or less means you can't
get the message across. Failure by 5 or more means that some false
information has been implied or inferred. Anyone listening to the
exchange can make a Sense Motive check opposed by the Bluff check you
made to transmit in order to intercept your message (see Sense Motive).

**Action:** Varies. A Bluff check made as part of general interaction
always takes at least 1 round (and is at least a full-round action), but
it can take much longer if you try something elaborate. A Bluff check
made to feint in combat or create a diversion to hide is a standard
action. A Bluff check made to deliver a secret message doesn't take an
action; it is part of normal communication.

**Try Again:** Varies. Generally, a failed Bluff check in social
interaction makes the target too suspicious for you to try again in the
same circumstances, but you may retry freely on Bluff checks made to
feint in combat. Retries are also allowed when you are trying to send a
message, but you may attempt such a retry only once per round.

Each retry carries the same chance of miscommunication.

**Special:** A ranger gains a bonus on Bluff checks when using this
skill against a favored enemy.

The master of a snake familiar gains a +3 bonus on Bluff checks.

If you have the Persuasive feat, you get a +2 bonus on Bluff checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Bluff, you get a +2 bonus on
Diplomacy, Intimidate, and Sleight of Hand checks, as well as on
Disguise checks made when you know you're being observed and you try to
act in character.


**Bluff Examples**

|Example Circumstances|Sense Motive Modifier|
|---|---|
|Example Circumstances|Sense Motive Modifier|
|The target wants to believe you.|-5|
|The bluff is believable and doesn't affect the target much.|+0|
|The bluff is a little hard to believe or puts the target at some risk.|+5|
|The bluff is hard to believe or puts the target at significant risk.|+10|
|The bluff is way out there, almost too incredible to consider.|+20|


### Climb 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Str; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** With a successful Climb check, you can advance up, down, or
across a slope, a wall, or some other steep incline (or even a ceiling
with handholds) at one-quarter your normal speed. A slope is considered
to be any incline at an angle measuring less than 60 degrees; a wall is
any incline at an angle measuring 60 degrees or more.

A Climb check that fails by 4 or less means that you make no progress,
and one that fails by 5 or more means that you fall from whatever height
you have already attained.

A climber's kit gives you a +2 circumstance bonus on Climb checks.

The DC of the check depends on the conditions of the climb. Compare the
task with those on the following table to determine an appropriate DC.

|Climb DC|Example Surface or Activity|
|---|---|
|0|A slope too steep to walk up, or a knotted rope with a wall to brace against.|
|5|A rope with a wall to brace against, or a knotted rope, or a rope affected by the rope trick spell.|
|10|A surface with ledges to hold on to and stand on, such as a very rough wall or a ship's rigging.|
|15|Any surface with adequate handholds and footholds (natural or artificial), such as a very rough natural rock surface or a tree, or an unknotted rope, or pulling yourself up when dangling by your hands.|
|20|An uneven surface with some narrow handholds and footholds, such as a typical wall in a dungeon or ruins.|
|25|A rough surface, such as a natural rock wall or a brick wall.|
|25|An overhang or ceiling with handholds but no footholds.|
|-|A perfectly smooth, flat, vertical surface cannot be climbed.|


|Climb DC Modifier<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|Example Surface or Activity|
|---|---|
|-10|Climbing a chimney (artificial or natural) or other location where you can brace against two opposite walls (reduces DC by 10).|
|-5|Climbing a corner where you can brace against perpendicular walls (reduces DC by 5).|
|+5|Surface is slippery (increases DC by 5).|
|<sup>1</sup>These modifiers are cumulative; use any that apply.|

You need both hands free to climb, but you may cling to a wall with one
hand while you cast a spell or take some other action that requires only
one hand. While climbing, you can't move to avoid a blow, so you lose
your Dexterity bonus to AC (if any). You also can't use a shield while
climbing.

Any time you take damage while climbing, make a Climb check against the
DC of the slope or wall. Failure means you fall from your current height
and sustain the appropriate falling damage.

*Accelerated Climbing:* You try to climb more quickly than normal. By
accepting a --5 penalty, you can move half your speed (instead of
one-quarter your speed).

*Making Your Own Handholds and Footholds:* You can make your own
handholds and footholds by pounding pitons into a wall. Doing so takes 1
minute per piton, and one piton is needed per 3 feet of distance. As
with any surface that offers handholds and footholds, a wall with pitons
in it has a DC of 15. In the same way, a climber with a handaxe or
similar implement can cut handholds in an ice wall.

*Catching Yourself When Falling:* It's practically impossible to catch
yourself on a wall while falling. Make a Climb check (DC = wall's DC +
20) to do so. It's much easier to catch yourself on a slope (DC =
slope's DC + 10).

*Catching a Falling Character While Climbing:* If someone climbing above
you or adjacent to you falls, you can attempt to catch the falling
character if he or she is within your reach. Doing so requires a
successful melee touch attack against the falling character (though he
or she can voluntarily forego any Dexterity bonus to AC if desired). If
you hit, you must immediately attempt a Climb check (DC = wall's DC +
10). Success indicates that you catch the falling character, but his or
her total weight, including equipment, cannot exceed your heavy load
limit or you automatically fall. If you fail your Climb check by 4 or
less, you fail to stop the character's fall but don't lose your grip on
the wall. If you fail by 5 or more, you fail to stop the character's
fall and begin falling as well.

**Action:** Climbing is part of movement, so it's generally part of a
move action (and may be combined with other types of movement in a move
action). Each move action that includes any climbing requires a separate
Climb check. Catching yourself or another falling character doesn't take
an action.

**Special:** You can use a rope to haul a character upward (or lower a
character) through sheer strength. You can lift double your maximum load
in this manner.

A halfling has a +2 racial bonus on Climb checks because halflings are
agile and surefooted.

The master of a lizard familiar gains a +3 bonus on Climb checks.

If you have the Athletic feat, you get a +2 bonus on Climb checks.

A creature with a climb speed has a +8 racial bonus on all Climb checks.
The creature must make a Climb check to climb any wall or slope with a
DC higher than 0, but it always can choose to take 10, even if rushed or
threatened while climbing. If a creature with a climb speed chooses an
accelerated climb (see above), it moves at double its climb speed (or at
its land speed, whichever is slower) and makes a single Climb check at a
--5 penalty. Such a creature retains its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class
(if any) while climbing, and opponents get no special bonus to their
attacks against it. It cannot, however, use the run action while
climbing.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Use Rope, you get a +2 bonus
on Climb checks made to climb a rope, a knotted rope, or a rope-and-wall
combination.

### Concentration 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Con))***

**Check:** You must make a Concentration check whenever you might
potentially be distracted (by taking damage, by harsh weather, and so
on) while engaged in some action that requires your full attention. Such
actions include casting a spell, concentrating on an active spell,
directing a spell, using a spell-like ability, or using a skill that
would provoke an attack of opportunity. In general, if an action
wouldn't normally provoke an attack of opportunity, you need not make a
Concentration check to avoid being distracted.

If the Concentration check succeeds, you may continue with the action as
normal. If the check fails, the action automatically fails and is
wasted. If you were in the process of casting a spell, the spell is
lost. If you were concentrating on an active spell, the spell ends as if
you had ceased concentrating on it. If you were directing a spell, the
direction fails but the spell remains active. If you were using a
spell-like ability, that use of the ability is lost. A skill use also
fails, and in some cases a failed skill check may have other
ramifications as well.

The table below summarizes various types of distractions that cause you
to make a Concentration check. If the distraction occurs while you are
trying to cast a spell, you must add the level of the spell you are
trying to cast to the appropriate Concentration DC. If more than one
type of distraction is present, make a check for each one; any failed
Concentration check indicates that the task is not completed.

|Concentration DC<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|Distraction|
|---|---|
|10 + damage dealt|Damaged during the action.<sup style="font-weight: 700">2</sup>|
|10 + half of continuous|Taking continuous damage during the damage last dealt action.<sup style="font-weight: 700">3</sup>|
|Distracting spell's save DC|Distracted by nondamaging spell.<sup style="font-weight: 700">4</sup>|
|10|Vigorous motion (on a moving mount, taking a bouncy wagon ride, in a small boat in rough water, belowdecks in a stormtossed ship).|
|15|Violent motion (on a galloping horse, taking a very rough wagon ride, in a small boat in rapids, on the deck of a storm-tossed ship).|
|20|Extraordinarily violent motion (earthquake).|
|15|Entangled.|
|20|Grappling or pinned. (You can cast only spells without somatic components for which you have any required material component in hand.)|
|5|Weather is a high wind carrying blinding rain or sleet.|
|10|Weather is wind-driven hail, dust, or debris.|
|Distracting spell's save DC|Weather caused by a spell, such as <i>storm of vengeance.</i><sup style="font-weight: 700">4</sup>|
|1 If you are trying to cast, concentrate on, or direct a spell when the distraction occurs, add the level of the spell to the indicated DC.|
|2 Such as during the casting of a spell with a casting time of 1 round or more, or the execution of an activity that takes more than a single full-round action (such as Disable Device). Also, damage stemming from an attack of opportunity or readied attack made in response to the spell being cast (for spells with a casting time of 1 action) or the action being taken (for activities requiring no more than a full-round action).|
|3 Such as from acid arrow.|
|4 If the spell allows no save, use the save DC it would have if it did allow a save.|

**Action:** None. Making a Concentration check doesn't take an action;
it is either a free action (when attempted reactively) or part of
another action (when attempted actively).

**Try Again:** Yes, though a success doesn't cancel the effect of a
previous failure, such as the loss of a spell you were casting or the
disruption of a spell you were concentrating on.

**Special:** You can use Concentration to cast a spell, use a spell-like
ability, or use a skill defensively, so as to avoid attacks of
opportunity altogether. This doesn't apply to other actions that might
provoke attacks of opportunity.

The DC of the check is 15 (plus the spell's level, if casting a spell or
using a spell-like ability defensively). If the Concentration check
succeeds, you may attempt the action normally without provoking any
attacks of opportunity. A successful Concentration check still doesn't
allow you to take 10 on another check if you are in a stressful
situation; you must make the check normally. If the Concentration check
fails, the related action also automatically fails (with any appropriate
ramifications), and the action is wasted, just as if your concentration
had been disrupted by a distraction.

A character with the Combat Casting feat gets a +4 bonus on
Concentration checks made to cast a spell or use a spell-like ability
while on the defensive or while grappling or pinned.

### Craft 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int))***

Like Knowledge, Perform, and Profession, Craft is actually a number of
separate skills. You could have several Craft skills, each with its own
ranks, each purchased as a separate skill.

A Craft skill is specifically focused on creating something. If nothing
is created by the endeavor, it probably falls under the heading of a
Profession skill.

**Check:** You can practice your trade and make a decent living, earning
about half your check result in gold pieces per week of dedicated work.
You know how to use the tools of your trade, how to perform the craft's
daily tasks, how to supervise untrained helpers, and how to handle
common problems. (Untrained laborers and assistants earn an average of 1
silver piece per day.)

The basic function of the Craft skill, however, is to allow you to make
an item of the appropriate type. The DC depends on the complexity of the
item to be created. The DC, your check results, and the price of the
item determine how long it takes to make a particular item. The item's
finished price also determines the cost of raw materials.

In some cases, the *fabricate* spell can be used to achieve the results
of a Craft check with no actual check involved. However, you must make
an appropriate Craft check when using the spell to make articles
requiring a high degree of craftsmanship.

A successful Craft check related to woodworking in conjunction with the
casting of the *ironwood* spell enables you to make wooden items that
have the strength of steel.

When casting the spell *minor creation*, you must succeed on an
appropriate Craft check to make a complex item.

All crafts require artisan's tools to give the best chance of success.
If improvised tools are used, the check is made with a --2 circumstance
penalty. On the other hand, masterwork artisan's tools provide a +2
circumstance bonus on the check.

To determine how much time and money it takes to make an item, follow
these steps.

1\. Find the item's price. Put the price in silver pieces (1 gp = 10
sp).

2\. Find the DC from the table below.

3\. Pay one-third of the item's price for the cost of raw materials.

4\. Make an appropriate Craft check representing one week's work. If the
check succeeds, multiply your check result by the DC. If the result ×
the DC equals the price of the item in sp, then you have completed the
item. (If the result × the DC equals double or triple the price of the
item in silver pieces, then you've completed the task in one-half or
one-third of the time. Other multiples of the DC reduce the time in the
same manner.) If the result × the DC doesn't equal the price, then it
represents the progress you've made this week. Record the result and
make a new Craft check for the next week. Each week, you make more
progress until your total reaches the price of the item in silver
pieces.

If you fail a check by 4 or less, you make no progress this week.

If you fail by 5 or more, you ruin half the raw materials and have to
pay half the original raw material cost again.

*Progress by the Day:* You can make checks by the day instead of by the
week. In this case your progress (check result × DC) is in copper pieces
instead of silver pieces.

*Creating Masterwork Items:* You can make a masterwork item---a weapon,
suit of armor, shield, or tool that conveys a bonus on its use through
its exceptional craftsmanship, not through being magical. To create a
masterwork item, you create the masterwork component as if it were a
separate item in addition to the standard item. The masterwork component
has its own price (300 gp for a weapon or 150 gp for a suit of armor or
a shield) and a Craft DC of 20. Once both the standard component and the
masterwork component are completed, the masterwork item is finished.
*Note:* The cost you pay for the masterwork component is one-third of
the given amount, just as it is for the cost in raw materials.

*Repairing Items:* Generally, you can repair an item by making checks
against the same DC that it took to make the item in the first place.
The cost of repairing an item is one-fifth of the item's price.

When you use the Craft skill to make a particular sort of item, the DC
for checks involving the creation of that item are typically as given on
the following table.


|Item|Craft Skill|Craft DC|
|---|---|---|
|Acid|Alchemy<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|15|
|Alchemist's fire, smokestick, or tindertwig|Alchemy<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|20|
|Antitoxin, sunrod, tanglefoot bag, or thunderstone|Alchemy<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|25|
|Armor or shield|Armorsmithing|10 + AC bonus|
|Longbow or shortbow|Bowmaking|12|
|Composite longbow or composite shortbow|Bowmaking|15|
|Composite longbow or composite shortbow with high strength rating|Bowmaking|15 + (2 � rating)|
|Crossbow|Weaponsmithing|15|
|Simple melee or thrown weapon|Weaponsmithing|12|
|Martial melee or thrown weapon|Weaponsmithing|15|
|Exotic melee or thrown weapon|Weaponsmithing|18|
|Mechanical trap|Trapmaking|Varies<sup style="font-weight: 700">2</sup>|
|Very simple item (wooden spoon)|Varies|5|
|Typical item (iron pot)|Varies|10|
|High-quality item (bell)|Varies|15|
|Complex or superior item (lock)|Varies|20|
|1 You must be a spellcaster to craft any of these items.|
|2 Traps have their own rules for construction.|


**Action:** Does not apply. Craft checks are made by the day or week
(see above).

**Try Again:** Yes, but each time you miss by 5 or more, you ruin half
the raw materials and have to pay half the original raw material cost
again.

**Special:** A dwarf has a +2 racial bonus on Craft checks that are
related to stone or metal, because dwarves are especially capable with
stonework and metalwork.

A gnome has a +2 racial bonus on Craft (alchemy) checks because gnomes
have sensitive noses.

You may voluntarily add +10 to the indicated DC to craft an item. This
allows you to create the item more quickly (since you'll be multiplying
this higher DC by your Craft check result to determine progress). You
must decide whether to increase the DC before you make each weekly or
daily check.

To make an item using Craft (alchemy), you must have alchemical
equipment and be a spellcaster. If you are working in a city, you can
buy what you need as part of the raw materials cost to make the item,
but alchemical equipment is difficult or impossible to come by in some
places. Purchasing and maintaining an alchemist's lab grants a +2
circumstance bonus on Craft (alchemy) checks because you have the
perfect tools for the job, but it does not affect the cost of any items
made using the skill.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 ranks in a Craft skill, you get a +2 bonus on
Appraise checks related to items made with that Craft skill.

### Decipher Script 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int; Trained Only))***

**Check:** You can decipher writing in an unfamiliar language or a
message written in an incomplete or archaic form. The base DC is 20 for
the simplest messages, 25 for standard texts, and 30 or higher for
intricate, exotic, or very old writing.

If the check succeeds, you understand the general content of a piece of
writing about one page long (or the equivalent). If the check fails,
make a DC 5 Wisdom check to see if you avoid drawing a false conclusion
about the text. (Success means that you do not draw a false conclusion;
failure means that you do.)

Both the Decipher Script check and (if necessary) the Wisdom check are
made secretly, so that you can't tell whether the conclusion you draw is
true or false.

**Action:** Deciphering the equivalent of a single page of script takes
1 minute (ten consecutive full-round actions).

**Try Again:** No.

**Special:** A character with the Diligent feat gets a +2 bonus on
Decipher Script checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Decipher Script, you get a
+2 bonus on Use Magic Device checks involving scrolls.

### Diplomacy 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha))***

**Check:** You can change the attitudes of others (nonplayer characters)
with a successful Diplomacy check; see the Influencing NPC Attitudes
sidebar, below, for basic DCs. In negotiations, participants roll
opposed Diplomacy checks, and the winner gains the advantage. Opposed
checks also resolve situations when two advocates or diplomats plead
opposite cases in a hearing before a third party.

**Action:** Changing others' attitudes with Diplomacy generally takes at
least 1 full minute (10 consecutive full-round actions). In some
situations, this time requirement may greatly increase. A rushed
Diplomacy check can be made as a full-round action, but you take a --10
penalty on the check.

**Try Again:** Optional, but not recommended because retries usually do
not work. Even if the initial Diplomacy check succeeds, the other
character can be persuaded only so far, and a retry may do more harm
than good. If the initial check fails, the other character has probably
become more firmly committed to his position, and a retry is futile.

**Special:** A half-elf has a +2 racial bonus on Diplomacy checks.

If you have the Negotiator feat, you get a +2 bonus on Diplomacy checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Bluff, Knowledge (nobility
and royalty), or Sense Motive, you get a +2 bonus on Diplomacy checks.

#### Influencing Npc Attitudes

Use the table below to determine the effectiveness of Diplomacy checks
(or Charisma checks) made to influence the attitude of a nonplayer
character, or wild empathy checks made to influence the attitude of an
animal or magical beast.

**Initial Attitude New Attitude (DC to achieve)**

|Hostile|Unfriendly|Indifferent|Friendly|Helpful|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Hostile|Unfriendly|Indifferent|Friendly|Helpful|
|Hostile|Less than 20|20|25|35|50|
|Unfriendly|Less than 5|5|15|25|40|
|Indifferent|-|Less than 1|1|15|30|
|Friendly|-|-|Less than 1|1|20|
|Helpful|-|-|-|Less than 1|1|


|Attitude|Means|Possible Actions|
|---|---|---|
|Hostile|Will take risks to hurt you|Attack, interfere, berate, flee|
|Unfriendly|Wishes you ill|Mislead, gossip, avoid, watch suspiciously, insult|
|Indifferent|Doesn't much care|Socially expected interaction|
|Friendly|Wishes you well|Chat, advise, offer limited help, advocate|
|Helpful|Will take risks to help you|Protect, back up, heal, aid|




### Disable Device 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int; Trained Only))***

**Check:** The Disable Device check is made secretly, so that you don't
necessarily know whether you've succeeded.

The DC depends on how tricky the device is. Disabling (or rigging or
jamming) a fairly simple device has a DC of 10; more intricate and
complex devices have higher DCs.

If the check succeeds, you disable the device. If it fails by 4 or less,
you have failed but can try again. If you fail by 5 or more, something
goes wrong. If the device is a trap, you spring it. If you're attempting
some sort of sabotage, you think the device is disabled, but it still
works normally.

You also can rig simple devices such as saddles or wagon wheels to work
normally for a while and then fail or fall off some time later (usually
after 1d4 rounds or minutes of use).


|Device|Time|Disable Device DC<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|Example|
|---|---|---|---|
|Simple|1 round|10|Jam a lock|
|Tricky|1d4 rounds|15|Sabotage a wagon wheel|
|Difficult|2d4 rounds|20|Disarm a trap, reset a trap|
|Wicked|2d4 rounds|25|Disarm a complex trap, cleverly sabotage a clockwork device|
|1If you attempt to leave behind no trace of your tampering, add 5 to the DC.|


**Action:** The amount of time needed to make a Disable Device check
depends on the task, as noted above. Disabling a simple device takes 1
round and is a full-round action. An intricate or complex device
requires 1d4 or 2d4 rounds.

**Try Again:** Varies. You can retry if you have missed the check by 4
or less, though you must be aware that you have failed in order to try
again.

**Special:** If you have the Nimble Fingers feat, you get a +2 bonus on
Disable Device checks.

A rogue who beats a trap's DC by 10 or more can study the trap, figure
out how it works, and bypass it (along with her companions) without
disarming it.

**Restriction:** Rogues (and other characters with the trapfinding class
feature) can disarm magic traps. A magic trap generally has a DC of 25 +
the spell level of the magic used to create it.

The spells *fire trap, glyph of warding, symbol,* and *teleportation
circle* also create traps that a rogue can disarm with a successful
Disable Device check. *Spike growth* and *spike stones,* however, create
magic traps against which Disable Device checks do not succeed. See the
individual spell descriptions for details.

#### Other Ways to Beat a Trap

It's possible to ruin many traps without making a Disable Device check.

**Ranged Attack Traps:** Once a trap's location is known, the obvious
way to ruin it is to smash the mechanism---assuming the mechanism can be
accessed. Failing that, it's possible to plug up the holes from which
the projectiles emerge. Doing this prevents the trap from firing unless
its ammunition does enough damage to break through the plugs.

**Melee Attack Traps:** These devices can be thwarted by smashing the
mechanism or blocking the weapons, as noted above. Alternatively, if a
character studies the trap as it triggers, he might be able to time his
dodges just right to avoid damage. A character who is doing nothing but
studying a trap when it first goes off gains a +4 dodge bonus against
its attacks if it is triggered again within the next minute.

**Pits:** Disabling a pit trap generally ruins only the trapdoor, making
it an uncovered pit. Filling in the pit or building a makeshift bridge
across it is an application of manual labor, not the Disable Device
skill. Characters could neutralize any spikes at the bottom of a pit by
attacking them---they break just as daggers do.

**Magic Traps:** *Dispel magic* helps here. Someone who succeeds on a
caster level check against the level of the trap's creator suppresses
the trap for 1d4 rounds. This works only with a targeted *dispel magic,*
not the area version (see the spell description).

### Disguise 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha))***

**Check:** Your Disguise check result determines how good the disguise
is, and it is opposed by others' Spot check results. If you don't draw
any attention to yourself, others do not get to make Spot checks. If you
come to the attention of people who are suspicious (such as a guard who
is watching commoners walking through a city gate), it can be assumed
that such observers are taking 10 on their Spot checks.

You get only one Disguise check per use of the skill, even if several
people are making Spot checks against it. The Disguise check is made
secretly, so that you can't be sure how good the result is.

The effectiveness of your disguise depends in part on how much you're
attempting to change your appearance.

|Disguise|Disguise Check Modifier|
|---|---|
|Minor details only|+5|
|Disguised as different gender<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|-2|
|Disguised as different race<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|-2|
|Disguised as different age category<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|-2<sup style="font-weight: 700">2</sup>|
|<sup>1</sup>These modifiers are cumulative; use any that apply.|
|<sup>2</sup>Per step of difference between your actual age category and your disguised age category. The steps are: young (younger than adulthood), adulthood, middle age, old, and venerable.|

If you are impersonating a particular individual, those who know what
that person looks like get a bonus on their Spot checks according to the
table below. Furthermore, they are automatically considered to be
suspicious of you, so opposed checks are always called for.

|Familiarity|Viewer's Spot Check Bonus|
|---|---|
|Recognizes on sight|+4|
|Friends or associates|+6|
|Close friends|+8|
|Intimate|+10|

Usually, an individual makes a Spot check to see through your disguise
immediately upon meeting you and each hour thereafter. If you casually
meet many different creatures, each for a short time, check once per day
or hour, using an average Spot modifier for the group.

**Action:** Creating a disguise requires 1d3×10 minutes of work.

**Try Again:** Yes. You may try to redo a failed disguise, but once
others know that a disguise was attempted, they'll be more suspicious.

**Special:** Magic that alters your form, such as *alter self, disguise
self, polymorph*, or *shapechange,* grants you a +10 bonus on Disguise
checks (see the individual spell descriptions). You must succeed on a
Disguise check with a +10 bonus to duplicate the appearance of a
specific individual using the *veil* spell. Divination magic that allows
people to see through illusions (such as *true seeing*) does not
penetrate a mundane disguise, but it can negate the magical component of
a magically enhanced one.

You must make a Disguise check when you cast a *simulacrum* spell to
determine how good the likeness is.

If you have the Deceitful feat, you get a +2 bonus on Disguise checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Bluff, you get a +2 bonus on
Disguise checks when you know that you're being observed and you try to
act in character.

### Escape Artist 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** The table below gives the DCs to escape various forms of
restraints.

*Ropes:* Your Escape Artist check is opposed by the binder's Use Rope
check. Since it's easier to tie someone up than to escape from being
tied up, the binder gets a +10 bonus on his or her check.

*Manacles and Masterwork Manacles:* The DC for manacles is set by their
construction.

*Tight Space:* The DC noted on the table is for getting through a space
where your head fits but your shoulders don't. If the space is long you
may need to make multiple checks. You can't get through a space that
your head does not fit through.

*Grappler:* You can make an Escape Artist check opposed by your enemy's
grapple check to get out of a grapple or out of a pinned condition (so
that you're only grappling).

|Restraint|Escape Artist DC|
|---|---|
|Ropes Binder's|Use Rope check at +10|
|Net, animate rope spell, command plants spell, control plants spell, or entangle spell|20|
|Snare spell|23|
|Manacles|30|
|Tight space|30|
|Masterwork manacles|35|
|Grappler|Grappler's grapple check result|

**Action:** Making an Escape Artist check to escape from rope bindings,
manacles, or other restraints (except a grappler) requires 1 minute of
work. Escaping from a net or an *animate rope, command plants, control
plants,* or *entangle* spell is a full-round action. Escaping from a
grapple or pin is a standard action. Squeezing through a tight space
takes at least 1 minute, maybe longer, depending on how long the space
is.

**Try Again:** Varies. You can make another check after a failed check
if you're squeezing your way through a tight space, making multiple
checks. If the situation permits, you can make additional checks, or
even take 20, as long as you're not being actively opposed.

**Special:** If you have the Agile feat, you get a +2 bonus on Escape
Artist checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Escape Artist, you get a +2
bonus on Use Rope checks to bind someone.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Use Rope, you get a +2 bonus on Escape
Artist checks when escaping from rope bonds.

### Forgery 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int))***

**Check:** Forgery requires writing materials appropriate to the
document being forged, enough light or sufficient visual acuity to see
the details of what you're writing, wax for seals (if appropriate), and
some time. To forge a document on which the handwriting is not specific
to a person (military orders, a government decree, a business ledger, or
the like), you need only to have seen a similar document before, and you
gain a +8 bonus on your check. To forge a signature, you need an
autograph of that person to copy, and you gain a +4 bonus on the check.
To forge a longer document written in the hand of some particular
person, a large sample of that person's handwriting is needed.

The Forgery check is made secretly, so that you're not sure how good
your forgery is. As with Disguise, you don't even need to make a check
until someone examines the work. Your Forgery check is opposed by the
Forgery check of the person who examines the document to check its
authenticity. The examiner gains modifiers on his or her check if any of
the conditions on the table below exist.

|Condition|Reader's Forgery Check Modifier|
|---|---|
|Type of document unknown to reader|-2|
|Type of document somewhat known to reader|+0|
|Type of document well known to reader|+2|
|Handwriting not known to reader|-2|
|Handwriting somewhat known to reader|+0|
|Handwriting intimately known to reader|+2|
|Reader only casually reviews the document|-2|

A document that contradicts procedure, orders, or previous knowledge, or
one that requires sacrifice on the part of the person checking the
document can increase that character's suspicion (and thus create
favorable circumstances for the checker's opposing Forgery check).

**Action:** Forging a very short and simple document takes about 1
minute. A longer or more complex document takes 1d4 minutes per page.

**Try Again:** Usually, no. A retry is never possible after a particular
reader detects a particular forgery. But the document created by the
forger might still fool someone else. The result of a Forgery check for
a particular document must be used for every instance of a different
reader examining the document. No reader can attempt to detect a
particular forgery more than once; if that one opposed check goes in
favor of the forger, then the reader can't try using his own skill
again, even if he's suspicious about the document.

**Special:** If you have the Deceitful feat, you get a +2 bonus on
Forgery checks.

**Restriction:** Forgery is language-dependent; thus, to forge documents
and detect forgeries, you must be able to read and write the language in
question. A barbarian can't learn the Forgery skill unless he has
learned to read and write.

### Gather Information 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha))***

**Check:** An evening's time, a few gold pieces for buying drinks and
making friends, and a DC 10 Gather Information check get you a general
idea of a city's major news items, assuming there are no obvious reasons
why the information would be withheld. The higher your check result, the
better the information.

If you want to find out about a specific rumor, or a specific item, or
obtain a map, or do something else along those lines, the DC for the
check is 15 to 25, or even higher.

**Action:** A typical Gather Information check takes 1d4+1 hours.

**Try Again:** Yes, but it takes time for each check. Furthermore, you
may draw attention to yourself if you repeatedly pursue a certain type
of information.

**Special:** A half-elf has a +2 racial bonus on Gather Information
checks.

If you have the Investigator feat, you get a +2 bonus on Gather
Information checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (local), you get a
+2 bonus on Gather Information checks.

### Handle Animal 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha; Trained Only))***

**Check:** The DC depends on what you are trying to do.

|Task|Handle Animal DC|
|---|---|
|Handle an animal|10|
|"Push" an animal|25|
|Teach an animal a trick|15 or 20<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|Train an animal for a general purpose|15 or 20<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|Rear a wild animal|15 + HD of animal|
|<sup>1</sup>See the specific trick or purpose below.|

|General Purpose|DC|General Purpose|DC|
|---|---|---|---|
|Combat riding|20|Hunting|20|
|Fighting|20|Performance|15|
|Guarding|20|Riding|15|
|Heavy labor|15||


*Handle an Animal:* This task involves commanding an animal to perform a
task or trick that it knows. If the animal is wounded or has taken any
nonlethal damage or ability score damage, the DC increases by 2. If your
check succeeds, the animal performs the task or trick on its next
action.

"*Push" an Animal:* To push an animal means to get it to perform a task
or trick that it doesn't know but is physically capable of performing.
This category also covers making an animal perform a forced march or
forcing it to hustle for more than 1 hour between sleep cycles. If the
animal is wounded or has taken any nonlethal damage or ability score
damage, the DC increases by 2. If your check succeeds, the animal
performs the task or trick on its next action.

*Teach an Animal a Trick:* You can teach an animal a specific trick with
one week of work and a successful Handle Animal check against the
indicated DC. An animal with an Intelligence score of 1 can learn a
maximum of three tricks, while an animal with an Intelligence score of 2
can learn a maximum of six tricks. Possible tricks (and their associated
DCs) include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following.

Attack (DC 20): The animal attacks apparent enemies. You may point to a
particular creature that you wish the animal to attack, and it will
comply if able. Normally, an animal will attack only humanoids,
monstrous humanoids, giants, or other animals. Teaching an animal to
attack all creatures (including such unnatural creatures as undead and
aberrations) counts as two tricks.

Come (DC 15): The animal comes to you, even if it normally would not do
so.

Defend (DC 20): The animal defends you (or is ready to defend you if no
threat is present), even without any command being given. Alternatively,
you can command the animal to defend a specific other character.

Down (DC 15): The animal breaks off from combat or otherwise backs down.
An animal that doesn't know this trick continues to fight until it must
flee (due to injury, a fear effect, or the like) or its opponent is
defeated.

Fetch (DC 15): The animal goes and gets something. If you do not point
out a specific item, the animal fetches some random object.

Guard (DC 20): The animal stays in place and prevents others from
approaching.

Heel (DC 15): The animal follows you closely, even to places where it
normally wouldn't go.

Perform (DC 15): The animal performs a variety of simple tricks, such as
sitting up, rolling over, roaring or barking, and so on.

Seek (DC 15): The animal moves into an area and looks around for
anything that is obviously alive or animate.

Stay (DC 15): The animal stays in place, waiting for you to return. It
does not challenge other creatures that come by, though it still defends
itself if it needs to.

Track (DC 20): The animal tracks the scent presented to it. (This
requires the animal to have the scent ability)

Work (DC 15): The animal pulls or pushes a medium or heavy load.

*Train an Animal for a Purpose:* Rather than teaching an animal
individual tricks, you can simply train it for a general purpose.
Essentially, an animal's purpose represents a preselected set of known
tricks that fit into a common scheme, such as guarding or heavy labor.
The animal must meet all the normal prerequisites for all tricks
included in the training package. If the package includes more than
three tricks, the animal must have an Intelligence score of 2.

An animal can be trained for only one general purpose, though if the
creature is capable of learning additional tricks (above and beyond
those included in its general purpose), it may do so. Training an animal
for a purpose requires fewer checks than teaching individual tricks
does, but no less time.

Combat Riding (DC 20): An animal trained to bear a rider into combat
knows the tricks attack, come, defend, down, guard, and heel. Training
an animal for combat riding takes six weeks. You may also "upgrade" an
animal trained for riding to one trained for combat riding by spending
three weeks and making a successful DC 20 Handle Animal check. The new
general purpose and tricks completely replace the animal's previous
purpose and any tricks it once knew. Warhorses and riding dogs are
already trained to bear riders into combat, and they don't require any
additional training for this purpose.

Fighting (DC 20): An animal trained to engage in combat knows the tricks
attack, down, and stay. Training an animal for fighting takes three
weeks.

Guarding (DC 20): An animal trained to guard knows the tricks attack,
defend, down, and guard. Training an animal for guarding takes four
weeks.

Heavy Labor (DC 15): An animal trained for heavy labor knows the tricks
come and work. Training an animal for heavy labor takes two weeks.

Hunting (DC 20): An animal trained for hunting knows the tricks attack,
down, fetch, heel, seek, and track. Training an animal for hunting takes
six weeks.

Performance (DC 15): An animal trained for performance knows the tricks
come, fetch, heel, perform, and stay. Training an animal for performance
takes five weeks.

Riding (DC 15): An animal trained to bear a rider knows the tricks come,
heel, and stay. Training an animal for riding takes three weeks.

*Rear a Wild Animal:* To rear an animal means to raise a wild creature
from infancy so that it becomes domesticated. A handler can rear as many
as three creatures of the same kind at once.

A successfully domesticated animal can be taught tricks at the same time
it's being raised, or it can be taught as a domesticated animal later.

**Action:** Varies. Handling an animal is a move action, while pushing
an animal is a full-round action. (A druid or ranger can handle her
animal companion as a free action or push it as a move action.) For
tasks with specific time frames noted above, you must spend half this
time (at the rate of 3 hours per day per animal being handled) working
toward completion of the task before you attempt the Handle Animal
check. If the check fails, your attempt to teach, rear, or train the
animal fails and you need not complete the teaching, rearing, or
training time. If the check succeeds, you must invest the remainder of
the time to complete the teaching, rearing, or training. If the time is
interrupted or the task is not followed through to completion, the
attempt to teach, rear, or train the animal automatically fails.

**Try Again:** Yes, except for rearing an animal.

**Special:** You can use this skill on a creature with an Intelligence
score of 1 or 2 that is not an animal, but the DC of any such check
increases by 5. Such creatures have the same limit on tricks known as
animals do.

A druid or ranger gains a +4 circumstance bonus on Handle Animal checks
involving her animal companion.

In addition, a druid's or ranger's animal companion knows one or more
bonus tricks, which don't count against the normal limit on tricks known
and don't require any training time or Handle Animal checks to teach.

If you have the Animal Affinity feat, you get a +2 bonus on Handle
Animal checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Handle Animal, you get a +2
bonus on Ride checks and wild empathy checks.

**Untrained:** If you have no ranks in Handle Animal, you can use a
Charisma check to handle and push domestic animals, but you can't teach,
rear, or train animals. A druid or ranger with no ranks in Handle Animal
can use a Charisma check to handle and push her animal companion, but
she can't teach, rear, or train other nondomestic animals.



## Heal 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Wis))***

**Check:** The DC and effect depend on the task you attempt.

|Task Heal|DC|
|---|---|
|First aid|15|
|Long-term care|15|
|Treat wound from caltrop, spike growth, or spike stones|15|
|Treat poison|Poison's save DC|
|Treat disease|Disease's save DC|

*First Aid:* You usually use first aid to save a dying character. If a
character has negative hit points and is losing hit points (at the rate
of 1 per round, 1 per hour, or 1 per day), you can make him or her
stable. A stable character regains no hit points but stops losing them.

*Long-Term Care:* Providing long-term care means treating a wounded
person for a day or more. If your Heal check is successful, the patient
recovers hit points or ability score points (lost to ability damage) at
twice the normal rate: 2 hit points per level for a full 8 hours of rest
in a day, or 4 hit points per level for each full day of complete rest;
2 ability score points for a full 8 hours of rest in a day, or 4 ability
score points for each full day of complete rest.

You can tend as many as six patients at a time. You need a few items and
supplies (bandages, salves, and so on) that are easy to come by in
settled lands. Giving long-term care counts as light activity for the
healer. You cannot give long-term care to yourself.

*Treat Wound from Caltrop, Spike Growth, or Spike Stones:* A creature
wounded by stepping on a caltrop moves at one-half normal speed. A
successful Heal check removes this movement penalty.

A creature wounded by a *spike growth* or *spike stones* spell must
succeed on a Reflex save or take injuries that reduce his speed by
one-third. Another character can remove this penalty by taking 10
minutes to dress the victim's injuries and succeeding on a Heal check
against the spell's save DC.

*Treat Poison:* To treat poison means to tend a single character who has
been poisoned and who is going to take more damage from the poison (or
suffer some other effect). Every time the poisoned character makes a
saving throw against the poison, you make a Heal check. The poisoned
character uses your check result or his or her saving throw, whichever
is higher.

*Treat Disease:* To treat a disease means to tend a single diseased
character. Every time he or she makes a saving throw against disease
effects, you make a Heal check. The diseased character uses your check
result or his or her saving throw, whichever is higher.

**Action:** Providing first aid, treating a wound, or treating poison is
a standard action. Treating a disease or tending a creature wounded by a
*spike growth* or *spike stones* spell takes 10 minutes of work.
Providing long-term care requires 8 hours of light activity.

**Try Again:** Varies. Generally speaking, you can't try a Heal check
again without proof of the original check's failure. You can always
retry a check to provide first aid, assuming the target of the previous
attempt is still alive.

**Special:** A character with the Self-Sufficient feat gets a +2 bonus
on Heal checks.

A healer's kit gives you a +2 circumstance bonus on Heal checks.

## Hide 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** Your Hide check is opposed by the Spot check of anyone who
might see you. You can move up to one-half your normal speed and hide at
no penalty. When moving at a speed greater than one-half but less than
your normal speed, you take a --5 penalty. It's practically impossible
(--20 penalty) to hide while attacking, running or charging.

A creature larger or smaller than Medium takes a size bonus or penalty
on Hide checks depending on its size category: Fine +16, Diminutive +12,
Tiny +8, Small +4, Large --4, Huge --8, Gargantuan --12, Colossal --16.

You need cover or concealment in order to attempt a Hide check. Total
cover or total concealment usually (but not always; see Special, below)
obviates the need for a Hide check, since nothing can see you anyway.

If people are observing you, even casually, you can't hide. You can run
around a corner or behind cover so that you're out of sight and then
hide, but the others then know at least where you went.

If your observers are momentarily distracted (such as by a Bluff check;
see below), though, you can attempt to hide. While the others turn their
attention from you, you can attempt a Hide check if you can get to a
hiding place of some kind. (As a general guideline, the hiding place has
to be within 1 foot per rank you have in Hide.) This check, however, is
made at a --10 penalty because you have to move fast.

*Sniping:* If you've already successfully hidden at least 10 feet from
your target, you can make one ranged attack, then immediately hide
again. You take a --20 penalty on your Hide check to conceal yourself
after the shot.

*Creating a Diversion to Hide:* You can use Bluff to help you hide. A
successful Bluff check can give you the momentary diversion you need to
attempt a Hide check while people are aware of you.

**Action:** Usually none. Normally, you make a Hide check as part of
movement, so it doesn't take a separate action. However, hiding
immediately after a ranged attack (see Sniping, above) is a move action.

**Special:** If you are invisible, you gain a +40 bonus on Hide checks
if you are immobile, or a +20 bonus on Hide checks if you're moving.

If you have the Stealthy feat, you get a +2 bonus on Hide checks.

A 13th-level ranger can attempt a Hide check in any sort of natural
terrain, even if it doesn't grant cover or concealment. A 17thlevel
ranger can do this even while being observed.

## Intimidate 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha))***

**Check:** You can change another's behavior with a successful check.
Your Intimidate check is opposed by the target's modified level check
(1d20 + character level or Hit Dice + target's Wisdom bonus \[if any\] +
target's modifiers on saves against fear). If you beat your target's
check result, you may treat the target as friendly, but only for the
purpose of actions taken while it remains intimidated. (That is, the
target retains its normal attitude, but will chat, advise, offer limited
help, or advocate on your behalf while intimidated. See the Diplomacy
skill, above, for additional details.) The effect lasts as long as the
target remains in your presence, and for 1d6×10 minutes afterward. After
this time, the target's default attitude toward you shifts to unfriendly
(or, if normally unfriendly, to hostile).

If you fail the check by 5 or more, the target provides you with
incorrect or useless information, or otherwise frustrates your efforts.

*Demoralize Opponent:* You can also use Intimidate to weaken an
opponent's resolve in combat. To do so, make an Intimidate check opposed
by the target's modified level check (see above). If you win, the target
becomes shaken for 1 round. A shaken character takes a --2 penalty on
attack rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. You can intimidate only
an opponent that you threaten in melee combat and that can see you.

**Action:** Varies. Changing another's behavior requires 1 minute of
interaction. Intimidating an opponent in combat is a standard action.

**Try Again:** Optional, but not recommended because retries usually do
not work. Even if the initial check succeeds, the other character can be
intimidated only so far, and a retry doesn't help. If the initial check
fails, the other character has probably become more firmly resolved to
resist the intimidator, and a retry is futile.

**Special:** You gain a +4 bonus on your Intimidate check for every size
category that you are larger than your target. Conversely, you take a
--4 penalty on your Intimidate check for every size category that you
are smaller than your target.

A character immune to fear can't be intimidated, nor can nonintelligent
creatures.

If you have the Persuasive feat, you get a +2 bonus on Intimidate
checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Bluff, you get a +2 bonus on
Intimidate checks.

## Jump 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Str; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** The DC and the distance you can cover vary according to the
type of jump you are attempting (see below).

Your Jump check is modified by your speed. If your speed is 30 feet then
no modifier based on speed applies to the check. If your speed is less
than 30 feet, you take a --6 penalty for every 10 feet of speed less
than 30 feet. If your speed is greater than 30 feet, you gain a +4 bonus
for every 10 feet beyond 30 feet.

All Jump DCs given here assume that you get a running start, which
requires that you move at least 20 feet in a straight line before
attempting the jump. If you do not get a running start, the DC for the
jump is doubled.

Distance moved by jumping is counted against your normal maximum
movement in a round.

If you have ranks in Jump and you succeed on a Jump check, you land on
your feet (when appropriate). If you attempt a Jump check untrained, you
land prone unless you beat the DC by 5 or more.

*Long Jump:* A long jump is a horizontal jump, made across a gap like a
chasm or stream. At the midpoint of the jump, you attain a vertical
height equal to one-quarter of the horizontal distance. The DC for the
jump is equal to the distance jumped (in feet).

If your check succeeds, you land on your feet at the far end. If you
fail the check by less than 5, you don't clear the distance, but you can
make a DC 15 Reflex save to grab the far edge of the gap. You end your
movement grasping the far edge. If that leaves you dangling over a chasm
or gap, getting up requires a move action and a DC 15 Climb check.

|Long Jump Distance|Jump DC<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|---|---|
|5 feet|5|
|10 feet|10|
|15 feet|15|
|20 feet|20|
|25 feet|25|
|30 feet|30|
|1 Requires a 20-foot running start. Without a running start, double the DC.|

*High Jump:* A high jump is a vertical leap made to reach a ledge high
above or to grasp something overhead. The DC is equal to 4 times the
distance to be cleared.

If you jumped up to grab something, a successful check indicates that
you reached the desired height. If you wish to pull yourself up, you can
do so with a move action and a DC 15 Climb check. If you fail the Jump
check, you do not reach the height, and you land on your feet in the
same spot from which you jumped. As with a long jump, the DC is doubled
if you do not get a running start of at least 20 feet.

|High Jump Distance<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|Jump DC<sup style="font-weight: 700">2</sup>|
|---|---|
|1 foot|4|
|2 feet|8|
|3 feet|12|
|4 feet|16|
|5 feet|20|
|6 feet|24|
|7 feet|28|
|8 feet|32|
|1 Not including vertical reach; see below.|
|2 Requires a 20-foot running start. Without a running start, double the DC.|

Obviously, the difficulty of reaching a given height varies according to
the size of the character or creature. The maximum vertical reach
(height the creature can reach without jumping) for an average creature
of a given size is shown on the table below. (As a Medium creature, a
typical human can reach 8 feet without jumping.)

Quadrupedal creatures don't have the same vertical reach as a bipedal
creature; treat them as being one size category smaller.

|Creature Size|Vertical Reach|
|---|---|
|Colossal|128 ft.|
|Gargantuan|64 ft.|
|Huge|32 ft.|
|Large|16 ft.|
|Medium|8 ft.|
|Small|4 ft.|
|Tiny|2 ft.|
|Diminutive|1 ft.|
|Fine|1/2 ft.|

*Hop Up:* You can jump up onto an object as tall as your waist, such as
a table or small boulder, with a DC 10 Jump check. Doing so counts as 10
feet of movement, so if your speed is 30 feet, you could move 20 feet,
then hop up onto a counter. You do not need to get a running start to
hop up, so the DC is not doubled if you do not get a running start.

*Jumping Down:* If you intentionally jump from a height, you take less
damage than you would if you just fell. The DC to jump down from a
height is 15. You do not have to get a running start to jump down, so
the DC is not doubled if you do not get a running start.

If you succeed on the check, you take falling damage as if you had
dropped 10 fewer feet than you actually did.

**Action:** None. A Jump check is included in your movement, so it is
part of a move action. If you run out of movement mid-jump, your next
action (either on this turn or, if necessary, on your next turn) must be
a move action to complete the jump.

**Special:** Effects that increase your movement also increase your
jumping distance, since your check is modified by your speed.

If you have the Run feat, you get a +4 bonus on Jump checks for any
jumps made after a running start.

A halfling has a +2 racial bonus on Jump checks because halflings are
agile and athletic.

If you have the Acrobatic feat, you get a +2 bonus on Jump checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you get a +2 bonus
on Jump checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Jump, you get a +2 bonus on Tumble
checks.

## Knowledge 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int; Trained Only))***

Like the Craft and Profession skills, Knowledge actually encompasses a
number of unrelated skills. Knowledge represents a study of some body of
lore, possibly an academic or even scientific discipline.

Below are listed typical fields of study.

-   Arcana (ancient mysteries, magic traditions, arcane symbols, cryptic
    phrases, constructs, dragons, magical beasts)
-   Architecture and engineering (buildings, aqueducts, bridges,
    fortifications)
-   Dungeoneering (aberrations, caverns, oozes, spelunking)
-   Geography (lands, terrain, climate, people)
-   History (royalty, wars, colonies, migrations, founding of cities)
-   Local (legends, personalities, inhabitants, laws, customs,
    traditions, humanoids)
-   Nature (animals, fey, giants, monstrous humanoids, plants, seasons
    and cycles, weather, vermin)
-   Nobility and royalty (lineages, heraldry, family trees, mottoes,
    personalities)
-   Religion (gods and goddesses, mythic history, ecclesiastic
    tradition, holy symbols, undead)
-   The planes (the Inner Planes, the Outer Planes, the Astral Plane,
    the Ethereal Plane, outsiders, elementals, magic related to the
    planes)

**Check:** Answering a question within your field of study has a DC of
10 (for really easy questions), 15 (for basic questions), or 20 to 30
(for really tough questions).

In many cases, you can use this skill to identify monsters and their
special powers or vulnerabilities. In general, the DC of such a check
equals 10 + the monster's HD. A successful check allows you to remember
a bit of useful information about that monster.

For every 5 points by which your check result exceeds the DC, you recall
another piece of useful information.

**Action:** Usually none. In most cases, making a Knowledge check
doesn't take an action---you simply know the answer or you don't.

**Try Again:** No. The check represents what you know, and thinking
about a topic a second time doesn't let you know something that you
never learned in the first place.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (arcana), you get
a +2 bonus on Spellcraft checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (architecture and engineering),
you get a +2 bonus on Search checks made to find secret doors or hidden
compartments.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (geography), you get a +2 bonus
on Survival checks made to keep from getting lost or to avoid natural
hazards.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (history), you get a +2 bonus
on bardic knowledge checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (local), you get a +2 bonus on
Gather Information checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (nature), you get a +2 bonus on
Survival checks made in aboveground natural environments (aquatic,
desert, forest, hill, marsh, mountains, or plains).

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (nobility and royalty), you get
a +2 bonus on Diplomacy checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (religion), you get a +2 bonus
on turning checks against undead.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (the planes), you get a +2
bonus on Survival checks made while on other planes.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (dungeoneering), you get a +2
bonus on Survival checks made while underground.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Survival, you get a +2 bonus on Knowledge
(nature) checks.

**Untrained:** An untrained Knowledge check is simply an Intelligence
check. Without actual training, you know only common knowledge (DC 10 or
lower).

## Listen 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Wis))***

**Check:** Your Listen check is either made against a DC that reflects
how quiet the noise is that you might hear, or it is opposed by your
target's Move Silently check.

|Listen DC|Sound|
|---|---|
|-10|A battle|
|0|People talking<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|5|A person in medium armor walking at a slow pace (10 ft./round) trying not to make any noise.|
|10|An unarmored person walking at a slow pace (15 ft./round) trying not to make any noise|
|15|A 1st-level rogue using Move Silently to sneak past the listener|
|15|People whispering<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|19|A cat stalking|
|30|An owl gliding in for a kill|
|1 If you beat the DC by 10 or more, you can make out what's being said, assuming that you understand the language.|

|Listen DC Modifier|Condition|
|---|---|
|+5|Through a door|
|+15|Through a stone wall|
|+1|Per 10 feet of distance|
|+5|Listener distracted|

In the case of people trying to be quiet, the DCs given on the table
could be replaced by Move Silently checks, in which case the indicated
DC would be their average check result.

**Action:** Varies. Every time you have a chance to hear something in a
reactive manner (such as when someone makes a noise or you move into a
new area), you can make a Listen check without using an action. Trying
to hear something you failed to hear previously is a move action.

**Try Again:** Yes. You can try to hear something that you failed to
hear previously with no penalty.

**Special:** When several characters are listening to the same thing, a
single 1d20 roll can be used for all the individuals' Listen checks.

A fascinated creature takes a --4 penalty on Listen checks made as
reactions.

If you have the Alertness feat, you get a +2 bonus on Listen checks.

A ranger gains a bonus on Listen checks when using this skill against a
favored enemy.

An elf, gnome, or halfling has a +2 racial bonus on Listen checks.

A half-elf has a +1 racial bonus on Listen checks..

A sleeping character may make Listen checks at a --10 penalty. A
successful check awakens the sleeper.

## Move Silently 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** Your Move Silently check is opposed by the Listen check of
anyone who might hear you. You can move up to one-half your normal speed
at no penalty. When moving at a speed greater than one-half but less
than your full speed, you take a --5 penalty. It's practically
impossible (--20 penalty) to move silently while running or charging.

Noisy surfaces, such as bogs or undergrowth, are tough to move silently
across. When you try to sneak across such a surface, you take a penalty
on your Move Silently check as indicated below.

|Surface|Check Modifier|
|---|---|
|Noisy (scree, shallow or deep bog, undergrowth, dense rubble)|-2|
|Very noisy (dense undergrowth, deep snow)|-5|

**Action:**None. A Move Silently check is included in your movement or
other activity, so it is part of another action.

**Special:** The master of a cat familiar gains a +3 bonus on Move
Silently checks.

A halfling has a +2 racial bonus on Move Silently checks.

If you have the Stealthy feat, you get a +2 bonus on Move Silently
checks.

## Open Lock 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Trained Only))***

Attempting an Open Lock check without a set of thieves' tools imposes a
--2 circumstance penalty on the check, even if a simple tool is
employed. If you use masterwork thieves' tools, you gain a +2
circumstance bonus on the check.

**Check:** The DC for opening a lock varies from 20 to 40, depending on
the quality of the lock, as given on the table below.

|Lock|DC|Lock|DC|
|---|---|---|---|
|Very simple lock|20|Good lock|30|
|Average lock|25|Amazing lock|40|

**Action:** Opening a lock is a full-round action.

**Special:** If you have the Nimble Fingers feat, you get a +2 bonus on
Open Lock checks.

**Untrained:** You cannot pick locks untrained, but you might
successfully force them open.

## Perform 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha))***

Like Craft, Knowledge, and Profession, Perform is actually a number of
separate skills.

You could have several Perform skills, each with its own ranks, each
purchased as a separate skill.

Each of the nine categories of the Perform skill includes a variety of
methods, instruments, or techniques, a small list of which is provided
for each category below.

-   Act (comedy, drama, mime)
-   Comedy (buffoonery, limericks, joke-telling)
-   Dance (ballet, waltz, jig)
-   Keyboard instruments (harpsichord, piano, pipe organ)
-   Oratory (epic, ode, storytelling)
-   Percussion instruments (bells, chimes, drums, gong)
-   String instruments (fiddle, harp, lute, mandolin)
-   Wind instruments (flute, pan pipes, recorder, shawm, trumpet)
-   Sing (ballad, chant, melody)

**Check:** You can impress audiences with your talent and skill.

|Perform DC|Performance|
|---|---|
|10|Routine performance. Trying to earn money by playing in public is essentially begging. You can earn 1d10 cp/day.|
|15|Enjoyable performance. In a prosperous city, you can earn 1d10 sp/day.|
|20|Great performance. In a prosperous city, you can earn 3d10 sp/day. In time, you may be invited to join a professional troupe and may develop a regional reputation.|
|25|Memorable performance. In a prosperous city, you can earn 1d6 gp/day. In time, you may come to the attention of noble patrons and develop a national reputation.|
|30|Extraordinary performance. In a prosperous city, you can earn 3d6 gp/day. In time, you may draw attention from distant potential patrons, or even from extraplanar beings.|

A masterwork musical instrument gives you a +2 circumstance bonus on
Perform checks that involve its use.

**Action:** Varies. Trying to earn money by playing in public requires
anywhere from an evening's work to a full day's performance. The bard's
special Perform-based abilities are described in that class's
description.

**Try Again:** Yes. Retries are allowed, but they don't negate previous
failures, and an audience that has been unimpressed in the past is
likely to be prejudiced against future performances. (Increase the DC by
2 for each previous failure.)

**Special:** A bard must have at least 3 ranks in a Perform skill to
inspire courage in his allies, or to use his countersong or his
*fascinate* ability. A bard needs 6 ranks in a Perform skill to inspire
competence, 9 ranks to use his *suggestion* ability, 12 ranks to inspire
greatness, 15 ranks to use his *song of freedom* ability, 18 ranks to
inspire heroics, and 21 ranks to use his *mass suggestion* ability. See
Bardic Music in the bard class description.

In addition to using the Perform skill, you can entertain people with
sleight of hand, tumbling, tightrope walking, and spells (especially
illusions).

## Profession 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Wis; Trained Only))***

Like Craft, Knowledge, and Perform, Profession is actually a number of
separate skills. You could have several Profession skills, each with its
own ranks, each purchased as a separate skill. While a Craft skill
represents ability in creating or making an item, a Profession skill
represents an aptitude in a vocation requiring a broader range of less
specific knowledge.

**Check:** You can practice your trade and make a decent living, earning
about half your Profession check result in gold pieces per week of
dedicated work. You know how to use the tools of your trade, how to
perform the profession's daily tasks, how to supervise helpers, and how
to handle common problems.

**Action:** Not applicable. A single check generally represents a week
of work.

**Try Again:** Varies. An attempt to use a Profession skill to earn an
income cannot be retried. You are stuck with whatever weekly wage your
check result brought you. Another check may be made after a week to
determine a new income for the next period of time. An attempt to
accomplish some specific task can usually be retried.

**Untrained:** Untrained laborers and assistants (that is, characters
without any ranks in Profession) earn an average of 1 silver piece per
day.

## Ride 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex))***

If you attempt to ride a creature that is ill suited as a mount, you
take a --5 penalty on your Ride checks.

**Check:** Typical riding actions don't require checks. You can saddle,
mount, ride, and dismount from a mount without a problem.

The following tasks do require checks.

|Task|Ride DC|Task|Ride DC|
|---|---|---|---|
|Guide with knees|5|Leap|15|
|Stay in saddle|5|Spur mount|15|
|Fight with warhorse|10|Control mount in battle|20|
|Cover|15|Fast mount or dismount|20<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|Soft fall|15|||
|1 Armor check penalty applies.|

*Guide with Knees:* You can react instantly to guide your mount with
your knees so that you can use both hands in combat. Make your Ride
check at the start of your turn. If you fail, you can use only one hand
this round because you need to use the other to control your mount.

*Stay in Saddle:* You can react instantly to try to avoid falling when
your mount rears or bolts unexpectedly or when you take damage. This
usage does not take an action.

*Fight with Warhorse:* If you direct your war-trained mount to attack in
battle, you can still make your own attack or attacks normally. This
usage is a free action.

*Cover:* You can react instantly to drop down and hang alongside your
mount, using it as cover. You can't attack or cast spells while using
your mount as cover. If you fail your Ride check, you don't get the
cover benefit. This usage does not take an action.

*Soft Fall:* You can react instantly to try to take no damage when you
fall off a mount---when it is killed or when it falls, for example. If
you fail your Ride check, you take 1d6 points of falling damage. This
usage does not take an action.

*Leap:* You can get your mount to leap obstacles as part of its
movement. Use your Ride modifier or the mount's Jump modifier, whichever
is lower, to see how far the creature can jump. If you fail your Ride
check, you fall off the mount when it leaps and take the appropriate
falling damage (at least 1d6 points). This usage does not take an
action, but is part of the mount's movement.

*Spur Mount:* You can spur your mount to greater speed with a move
action. A successful Ride check increases the mount's speed by 10 feet
for 1 round but deals 1 point of damage to the creature. You can use
this ability every round, but each consecutive round of additional speed
deals twice as much damage to the mount as the previous round (2 points,
4 points, 8 points, and so on).

*Control Mount in Battle:* As a move action, you can attempt to control
a light horse, pony, heavy horse, or other mount not trained for combat
riding while in battle. If you fail the Ride check, you can do nothing
else in that round. You do not need to roll for warhorses or warponies.

*Fast Mount or Dismount:* You can attempt to mount or dismount from a
mount of up to one size category larger than yourself as a free action,
provided that you still have a move action available that round. If you
fail the Ride check, mounting or dismounting is a move action. You can't
use fast mount or dismount on a mount more than one size category larger
than yourself.

**Action:** Varies. Mounting or dismounting normally is a move action.
Other checks are a move action, a free action, or no action at all, as
noted above.

**Special:** If you are riding bareback, you take a --5 penalty on Ride
checks.

If your mount has a military saddle you get a +2 circumstance bonus on
Ride checks related to staying in the saddle.

The Ride skill is a prerequisite for the feats Mounted Archery, Mounted
Combat, Ride-By Attack, Spirited Charge,

Trample.

If you have the Animal Affinity feat, you get a +2 bonus on Ride checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Handle Animal, you get a +2
bonus on Ride checks.

## Search 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Int))***

**Check:** You generally must be within 10 feet of the object or surface
to be searched. The table below gives DCs for typical tasks involving
the Search skill.

|Task|Search DC|
|---|---|
|Ransack a chest full of junk to find a certain item|10|
|Notice a typical secret door or a simple trap|20|
|Find a difficult nonmagical trap (rogue only)<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|21 or higher|
|Find a magic trap (rogue only)<sup style="font-weight: 700">1 </sup>|25 + level of spell used to create trap|
|Notice a well-hidden secret door|30|
|Find a footprint|Varies<sup style="font-weight: 700">2</sup>|
|1 Dwarves (even if they are not rogues) can use Search to find traps built into or out of stone.|
|2 A successful Search check can find a footprint or similar sign of a creature's passage, but it won't let you find or follow a trail. See the Track feat for the appropriate DC.|

**Action:** It takes a full-round action to search a 5-foot-by-5-foot
area or a volume of goods 5 feet on a side.

**Special:** An elf has a +2 racial bonus on Search checks, and a
half-elf has a +1 racial bonus. An elf (but not a half-elf) who simply
passes within 5 feet of a secret or concealed door can make a Search
check to find that door.

If you have the Investigator feat, you get a +2 bonus on Search checks.

The spells *explosive runes, fire trap, glyph of warding, symbol,* and
*teleportation circle* create magic traps that a rogue can find by
making a successful Search check and then can attempt to disarm by using
Disable Device. Identifying the location of a *snare* spell has a DC of
23. *Spike growth* and *spike stones* create magic traps that can be
found using Search, but against which Disable Device checks do not
succeed. See the individual spell descriptions for details.

Active abjuration spells within 10 feet of each other for 24 hours or
more create barely visible energy fluctuations. These fluctuations give
you a +4 bonus on Search checks to locate such abjuration spells.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Search, you get a +2 bonus
on Survival checks to find or follow tracks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (architecture and engineering),
you get a +2 bonus on Search checks to find secret doors or hidden
compartments.

**Restriction:** While anyone can use Search to find a trap whose DC is
20 or lower, only a rogue can use Search to locate traps with higher
DCs. (*Exception:* The spell *find traps* temporarily enables a cleric
to use the Search skill as if he were a rogue.)

A dwarf, even one who is not a rogue, can use the Search skill to find a
difficult trap (one with a DC higher than 20) if the trap is built into
or out of stone. He gains a +2 racial bonus on the Search check from his
stonecunning ability.

## Sense Motive 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Wis))***

**Check:** A successful check lets you avoid being bluffed (see the
Bluff skill). You can also use this skill to determine when "something
is up" (that is, something odd is going on) or to assess someone's
trustworthiness.

|Task|Sense Motive DC|
|---|---|
|Hunch|20|
|Sense enchantment|25 or 15|
|Discern secret message|Varies|


*Hunch:* This use of the skill involves making a gut assessment of the
social situation. You can get the feeling from another's behavior that
something is wrong, such as when you're talking to an impostor.
Alternatively, you can get the feeling that someone is trustworthy.

*Sense Enchantment:* You can tell that someone's behavior is being
influenced by an enchantment effect (by definition, a mind-affecting
effect),even if that person isn't aware of it. The usual DC is 25, but
if the target is dominated (see *dominate person*), the DC is only 15
because of the limited range of the target's activities.

*Discern Secret Message:* You may use Sense Motive to detect that a
hidden message is being transmitted via the Bluff skill. In this case,
your Sense Motive check is opposed by the Bluff check of the character
transmitting the message. For each piece of information relating to the
message that you are missing, you take a --2 penalty on your Sense
Motive check. If you succeed by 4 or less, you know that something
hidden is being communicated, but you can't learn anything specific
about its content. If you beat the DC by 5 or more, you intercept and
understand the message. If you fail by 4 or less, you don't detect any
hidden communication. If you fail by 5 or more, you infer some false
information.

**Action:** Trying to gain information with Sense Motive generally takes
at least 1 minute, and you could spend a whole evening trying to get a
sense of the people around you.

**Try Again:** No, though you may make a Sense Motive check for each
Bluff check made against you.

**Special:** A ranger gains a bonus on Sense Motive checks when using
this skill against a favored enemy.

If you have the Negotiator feat, you get a +2 bonus on Sense Motive
checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Sense Motive, you get a +2
bonus on Diplomacy checks.

## Sleight of Hand 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Trained Only; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** A DC 10 Sleight of Hand check lets you palm a coin-sized,
unattended object. Performing a minor feat of legerdemain, such as
making a coin disappear, also has a DC of 10 unless an observer is
determined to note where the item went.

When you use this skill under close observation, your skill check is
opposed by the observer's Spot check. The observer's success doesn't
prevent you from performing the action, just from doing it unnoticed.

You can hide a small object (including a light weapon or an easily
concealed ranged weapon, such as a dart, sling, or hand crossbow) on
your body. Your Sleight of Hand check is opposed by the Spot check of
anyone observing you or the Search check of anyone frisking you. In the
latter case, the searcher gains a +4 bonus on the Search check, since
it's generally easier to find such an object than to hide it. A dagger
is easier to hide than most light weapons, and grants you a +2 bonus on
your Sleight of Hand check to conceal it. An extraordinarily small
object, such as a coin, shuriken, or ring, grants you a +4 bonus on your
Sleight of Hand check to conceal it, and heavy or baggy clothing (such
as a cloak) grants you a +2 bonus on the check.

Drawing a hidden weapon is a standard action and doesn't provoke an
attack of opportunity.

If you try to take something from another creature, you must make a DC
20 Sleight of Hand check to obtain it. The opponent makes a Spot check
to detect the attempt, opposed by the same Sleight of Hand check result
you achieved when you tried to grab the item. An opponent who succeeds
on this check notices the attempt, regardless of whether you got the
item.

You can also use Sleight of Hand to entertain an audience as though you
were using the Perform skill. In such a case, your "act" encompasses
elements of legerdemain, juggling, and the like.

|Sleight of Hand DC|Task|
|---|---|
|10|Palm a coin-sized object, make a coin disappear|
|20|Lift a small object from a person|

**Action:** Any Sleight of Hand check normally is a standard action.
However, you may perform a Sleight of Hand check as a free action by
taking a --20 penalty on the check.

**Try Again:** Yes, but after an initial failure, a second Sleight of
Hand attempt against the same target (or while you are being watched by
the same observer who noticed your previous attempt) increases the DC
for the task by 10.

**Special:** If you have the Deft Hands feat, you get a +2 bonus on
Sleight of Hand checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Bluff, you get a +2 bonus on
Sleight of Hand checks.

**Untrained:** An untrained Sleight of Hand check is simply a Dexterity
check. Without actual training, you can't succeed on any Sleight of Hand
check with a DC higher than 10, except for hiding an object on your
body.

## Speak Language 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(None; Trained Only))***

**Common Languages and Their Alphabets**

|Language|Typical Speakers|Alphabet|
|---|---|---|
|Language|Typical Speakers|Alphabet|
|Abyssal|Demons, chaotic evil outsiders|Infernal|
|Aquan|Water-based creatures|Elven|
|Auran|Air-based creatures|Draconic|
|Celestial|Good outsiders|Celestial|
|Common|Humans, halflings, half-elves, half-orcs|Common|
|Draconic|Kobolds, troglodytes, lizardfolk, dragons|Draconic|
|Druidic|Druids (only)|Druidic|
|Dwarven|Dwarves|Dwarven|
|Elven|Elves|Elven|
|Giant|Ogres, giants|Dwarven|
|Gnome|Gnomes|Dwarven|
|Goblin|Goblins, hobgoblins, bugbears|Dwarven|
|Gnoll|Gnolls|Common|
|Halfling|Halflings|Common|
|Ignan|Fire-based creatures|Draconic|
|Infernal|Devils, lawful evil outsiders|Infernal|
|Orc|Orcs|Dwarven|
|Sylvan|Dryads, brownies, leprechauns|Elven|
|Terran|Xorns and other earth-based creatures|Dwarven|
|Undercommon|Drow|Elven|

**Action:** Not applicable.

**Try Again:** Not applicable. There are no Speak Language checks to
fail.

The Speak Language skill doesn't work like other skills. Languages work
as follows.

-   You start at 1st level knowing one or two languages (based on your
    race), plus an additional number of languages equal to your starting
    Intelligence bonus.
-   You can purchase Speak Language just like any other skill, but
    instead of buying a rank in it, you choose a new language that you
    can speak.
-   You don't make Speak Language checks. You either know a language or
    you don't.
-   A literate character (anyone but a barbarian who has not spent skill
    points to become literate) can read and write any language she
    speaks. Each language has an alphabet, though sometimes several
    spoken languages share a single alphabet.

## Spellcraft (Int; Trained Only) {#spellcraft}

Use this skill to identify spells as they are cast or spells already in
place.

|Spellcraft DC|Task|
|---|---|
|13|When using read magic, identify a glyph of warding. No action required.|
|15 + spell level|Identify a spell being cast. (You must see or hear the spell's verbal or somatic components.) No action required. No retry.|
|15 + spell level|Learn a spell from a spellbook or scroll (wizard only). No retry for that spell until you gain at least 1 rank in Spellcraft (even if you find another source to try to learn the spell from). Requires 8 hours.|
|15 + spell level|Prepare a spell from a borrowed spellbook (wizard only). One try per day. No extra time required.|
|15 + spell level|When casting detect magic, determine the school of magic involved in the aura of a single item or creature you can see. (If the aura is not a spell effect, the DC is 15 + one-half caster level.) No action required.|
|19|When using read magic, identify a symbol. No action required.|
|20 + spell level|Identify a spell that's already in place and in effect. You must be able to see or detect the effects of the spell. No action required. No retry.|
|20 + spell level|Identify materials created or shaped by magic, such as noting that an iron wall is the result of a wall of iron spell. No action required. No retry.|
|20 + spell level|Decipher a written spell (such as a scroll) without using read magic. One try per day. Requires a full-round action.|
|25 + spell level|After rolling a saving throw against a spell targeted on you, determine what that spell was. No action required. No retry.|
|25|Identify a potion. Requires 1 minute. No retry.|
|20|Draw a diagram to allow dimensional anchor to be cast on a magic circle spell. Requires 10 minutes. No retry. This check is made secretly so you do not know the result.|
|30 or higher|Understand a strange or unique magical effect, such as the effects of a magic stream. Time required varies. No retry.|

**Check:** You can identify spells and magic effects. The DCs for
Spellcraft checks relating to various tasks are summarized on the table
above.

**Action:** Varies, as noted above.

**Try Again:** See above.

**Special:** If you are a specialist wizard, you get a +2 bonus on
Spellcraft checks when dealing with a spell or effect from your
specialty school. You take a --5 penalty when dealing with a spell or
effect from a prohibited school (and some tasks, such as learning a
prohibited spell, are just impossible).

If you have the Magical Aptitude feat, you get a +2 bonus on Spellcraft
checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (arcana), you get
a +2 bonus on Spellcraft checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Use Magic Device, you get a +2 bonus on
Spellcraft checks to decipher spells on scrolls.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Spellcraft, you get a +2 bonus on Use
Magic Device checks related to scrolls.

Additionally, certain spells allow you to gain information about magic,
provided that you make a successful Spellcraft check as detailed in the
spell description.

## Spot 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Wis))***

**Check:** The Spot skill is used primarily to detect characters or
creatures who are hiding. Typically, your Spot check is opposed by the
Hide check of the creature trying not to be seen. Sometimes a creature
isn't intentionally hiding but is still difficult to see, so a
successful Spot check is necessary to notice it.

A Spot check result higher than 20 generally lets you become aware of an
invisible creature near you, though you can't actually see it.

Spot is also used to detect someone in disguise (see the Disguise
skill), and to read lips when you can't hear or understand what someone
is saying.

Spot checks may be called for to determine the distance at which an
encounter begins. A penalty applies on such checks, depending on the
distance between the two individuals or groups, and an additional
penalty may apply if the character making the Spot check is distracted
(not concentrating on being observant).

|Condition|Penalty|
|---|---|
|Per 10 feet of distance|-1|
|Spotter distracted|-5|

*Read Lips:* To understand what someone is saying by reading lips, you
must be within 30 feet of the speaker, be able to see him or her speak,
and understand the speaker's language. (This use of the skill is
language-dependent.) The base DC is 15, but it increases for complex
speech or an inarticulate speaker. You must maintain a line of sight to
the lips being read.

If your Spot check succeeds, you can understand the general content of a
minute's worth of speaking, but you usually still miss certain details.
If the check fails by 4 or less, you can't read the speaker's lips. If
the check fails by 5 or more, you draw some incorrect conclusion about
the speech. The check is rolled secretly in this case, so that you don't
know whether you succeeded or missed by 5.

**Action:** Varies. Every time you have a chance to spot something in a
reactive manner you can make a Spot check without using an action.
Trying to spot something you failed to see previously is a move action.
To read lips, you must concentrate for a full minute before making a
Spot check, and you can't perform any other action (other than moving at
up to half speed) during this minute.

**Try Again:** Yes. You can try to spot something that you failed to see
previously at no penalty. You can attempt to read lips once per minute.

**Special:** A fascinated creature takes a --4 penalty on Spot checks
made as reactions.

If you have the Alertness feat, you get a +2 bonus on Spot checks.

A ranger gains a bonus on Spot checks when using this skill against a
favored enemy.

An elf has a +2 racial bonus on Spot checks.

A half-elf has a +1 racial bonus on Spot checks.

The master of a hawk familiar gains a +3 bonus on Spot checks in
daylight or other lighted areas.

The master of an owl familiar gains a +3 bonus on Spot checks in shadowy
or other darkened areas.

## Survival 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Wis))***

**Check:** You can keep yourself and others safe and fed in the wild.
The table below gives the DCs for various tasks that require Survival
checks.

Survival does not allow you to follow difficult tracks unless you are a
ranger or have the Track feat (see the Restriction section below).

|Survival DC|Task|
|---|---|
|10|Get along in the wild. Move up to one-half your overland speed while hunting and foraging (no food or water supplies needed). You can provide food and water for one other person for every 2 points by which your check result exceeds 10.|
|15|Gain a +2 bonus on all Fortitude saves against severe weather while moving up to one-half your overland speed, or gain a +4 bonus if you remain stationary. You may grant the same bonus to one other character for every 1 point by which your Survival check result exceeds 15.|
|15|Keep from getting lost or avoid natural hazards, such as quicksand.|
|15|Predict the weather up to 24 hours in advance. For every 5 points by which your Survival check result exceeds 15, you can predict the weather for one additional day in advance.|
|Varies|Follow tracks (see the Track feat).|

**Action:** Varies. A single Survival check may represent activity over
the course of hours or a full day. A Survival check made to find tracks
is at least a full-round action, and it may take even longer.

**Try Again:** Varies. For getting along in the wild or for gaining the
Fortitude save bonus noted in the table above, you make a Survival check
once every 24 hours. The result of that check applies until the next
check is made. To avoid getting lost or avoid natural hazards, you make
a Survival check whenever the situation calls for one. Retries to avoid
getting lost in a specific situation or to avoid a specific natural
hazard are not allowed. For finding tracks, you can retry a failed check
after 1 hour (outdoors) or 10 minutes(indoors) of searching.

**Restriction:** While anyone can use Survival to find tracks
(regardless of the DC), or to follow tracks when the DC for the task is
10 or lower, only a ranger (or a character with the Track feat) can use
Survival to follow tracks when the task has a higher DC.

**Special:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Survival, you can
automatically determine where true north lies in relation to yourself.

A ranger gains a bonus on Survival checks when using this skill to find
or follow the tracks of a favored enemy.

If you have the Self-Sufficient feat, you get a +2 bonus on Survival
checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Survival, you get a +2 bonus
on Knowledge (nature) checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (dungeoneering), you get a +2
bonus on Survival checks made while underground.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (nature), you get a +2 bonus on
Survival checks in aboveground natural environments (aquatic, desert,
forest, hill, marsh, mountains, and plains).

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (geography), you get a +2 bonus
on Survival checks made to keep from getting lost or to avoid natural
hazards.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Knowledge (the planes), you get a +2
bonus on Survival checks made while on other planes.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Search, you get a +2 bonus on Survival
checks to find or follow tracks.

## Swim 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Str; Armor Check Penalty))***

**Check:** Make a Swim check once per round while you are in the water.
Success means you may swim at up to one-half your speed (as a full-round
action) or at one-quarter your speed (as a move action). If you fail by
4 or less, you make no progress through the water. If you fail by 5 or
more, you go underwater.

If you are underwater, either because you failed a Swim check or because
you are swimming underwater intentionally, you must hold your breath.
You can hold your breath for a number of rounds equal to your
Constitution score, but only if you do nothing other than take move
actions or free actions. If you take a standard action or a full-round
action (such as making an attack), the remainder of the duration for
which you can hold your breath is reduced by 1 round. (Effectively, a
character in combat can hold his or her breath only half as long as
normal.) After that period of time, you must make a DC 10 Constitution
check every round to continue holding your breath. Each round, the DC
for that check increases by 1. If you fail the Constitution check, you
begin to drown.

The DC for the Swim check depends on the water, as given on the table
below.

|Water|Swim DC|
|---|---|
|Calm water|10|
|Rough water|15|
|Stormy water|20<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|
|1 You can't take 10 on a Swim check in stormy water, even if you aren't otherwise being threatened or distracted.|

Each hour that you swim, you must make a DC 20 Swim check or take 1d6
points of nonlethal damage from fatigue.

**Action:** A successful Swim check allows you to swim one-quarter of
your speed as a move action or one-half your speed as a full-round
action.

**Special:** Swim checks are subject to double the normal armor check
penalty and encumbrance penalty.

If you have the Athletic feat, you get a +2 bonus on Swim checks.

If you have the Endurance feat, you get a +4 bonus on Swim checks made
to avoid taking nonlethal damage from fatigue.

A creature with a swim speed can move through water at its indicated
speed without making Swim checks. It gains a +8 racial bonus on any Swim
check to perform a special action or avoid a hazard. The creature always
can choose to take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered
when swimming. Such a creature can use the run action while swimming,
provided that it swims in a straight line.

## Tumble 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex; Trained Only; Armor Check Penalty))***

You can't use this skill if your speed has been reduced by armor, excess
equipment, or loot.

**Check:** You can land softly when you fall or tumble past opponents.
You can also tumble to entertain an audience (as though using the
Perform skill). The DCs for various tasks involving the Tumble skill are
given on the table below.


|Tumble DC|Task|
|---|---|
|15|Treat a fall as if it were 10 feet shorter than it really is when determining damage.|
|15|Tumble at one-half speed as part of normal movement, provoking no attacks of opportunity while doing so. Failure means you provoke attacks of opportunity normally. Check separately for each opponent you move past, in the order in which you pass them (player's choice of order in case of a tie). Each additional enemy after the first adds +2 to the Tumble DC.|
|25|Tumble at one-half speed through an area occupied by an enemy (over, under, or around the opponent) as part of normal movement, provoking no attacks of opportunity while doing so. Failure means you stop before entering the enemy-occupied area and provoke an attack of opportunity from that enemy. Check separately for each opponent. Each additional enemy after the first adds +2 to the Tumble DC.|


Obstructed or otherwise treacherous surfaces, such as natural cavern
floors or undergrowth, are tough to tumble through. The DC for any
Tumble check made to tumble into such a square is modified as indicated
below.

|Surface Is . . .|DC Modifier|
|---|---|
|Lightly obstructed (scree, light rubble, shallow bog<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>, undergrowth)|+2|
|Severely obstructed (natural cavern floor, dense rubble, dense undergrowth)|+5|
|Lightly slippery (wet floor)|+2|
|Severely slippery (ice sheet)|+5|
|Sloped or angled|+2|
|1 Tumbling is impossible in a deep bog.|

*Accelerated Tumbling:* You try to tumble past or through enemies more
quickly than normal. By accepting a --10 penalty on your Tumble checks,
you can move at your full speed instead of one-half your speed.

**Action:** Not applicable. Tumbling is part of movement, so a Tumble
check is part of a move action.

**Try Again:** Usually no. An audience, once it has judged a tumbler as
an uninteresting performer, is not receptive to repeat performances.

You can try to reduce damage from a fall as an instant reaction only
once per fall.

**Special:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you gain a +3 dodge
bonus to AC when fighting defensively instead of the usual +2 dodge
bonus to AC.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you gain a +6 dodge bonus to AC
when executing the total defense standard action instead of the usual +4
dodge bonus to AC.

If you have the Acrobatic feat, you get a +2 bonus on Tumble checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you get a +2 bonus
on Balance and Jump checks.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Jump, you get a +2 bonus on Tumble
checks.

## Use Magic Device 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Cha; Trained Only))***

Use this skill to activate magic

**Check:** You can use this skill to read a spell or to activate a magic
item. Use Magic Device lets you use a magic item as if you had the spell
ability or class features of another class, as if you were a different
race, or as if you were of a different alignment.

You make a Use Magic Device check each time you activate a device such
as a wand. If you are using the check to emulate an alignment or some
other quality in an ongoing manner, you need to make the relevant Use
Magic Device check once per hour.

You must consciously choose which requirement to emulate. That is, you
must know what you are trying to emulate when you make a Use Magic
Device check for that purpose. The DCs for various tasks involving Use
Magic Device checks are summarized on the table below.


|Task|Use Magic Device DC|
|---|---|
|Activate blindly|25|
|Decipher a written spell|25 + spell level|
|Use a scroll|20 + caster level|
|Use a wand|20|
|Emulate a class feature|20|
|Emulate an ability score|See text|
|Emulate a race|25|
|Emulate an alignment|30|

*Activate Blindly:* Some magic items are activated by special words,
thoughts, or actions. You can activate such an item as if you were using
the activation word, thought, or action, even when you're not and even
if you don't know it. You do have to perform some equivalent activity in
order to make the check. That is, you must speak, wave the item around,
or otherwise attempt to get it to activate. You get a special +2 bonus
on your Use Magic Device check if you've activated the item in question
at least once before. If you fail by 9 or less, you can't activate the
device. If you fail by 10 or more, you suffer a mishap. A mishap means
that magical energy gets released but it doesn't do what you wanted it
to do. The default mishaps are that the item affects the wrong target or
that uncontrolled magical energy is released, dealing 2d6 points of
damage to you. This mishap is in addition to the chance for a mishap
that you normally run when you cast a spell from a scroll that you could
not otherwise cast yourself.

*Decipher a Written Spell:* This usage works just like deciphering a
written spell with the Spellcraft skill, except that the DC is 5 points
higher. Deciphering a written spell requires 1 minute of concentration.

*Emulate an Ability Score:* To cast a spell from a scroll, you need a
high score in the appropriate ability (Intelligence for wizard spells,
Wisdom for divine spells, or Charisma for sorcerer or bard spells). Your
effective ability score (appropriate to the class you're emulating when
you try to cast the spell from the scroll) is your Use Magic Device
check result minus 15. If you already have a high enough score in the
appropriate ability, you don't need to make this check.

*Emulate an Alignment:* Some magic items have positive or negative
effects based on the user's alignment. Use Magic Device lets you use
these items as if you were of an alignment of your choice. You can
emulate only one alignment at a time.

*Emulate a Class Feature:* Sometimes you need to use a class feature to
activate a magic item. In this case, your effective level in the
emulated class equals your Use Magic Device check result minus 20. This
skill does not let you actually use the class feature of another class.
It just lets you activate items as if you had that class feature. If the
class whose feature you are emulating has an alignment requirement, you
must meet it, either honestly or by emulating an appropriate alignment
with a separate Use Magic Device check (see above).

*Emulate a Race:* Some magic items work only for members of certain
races, or work better for members of those races. You can use such an
item as if you were a race of your choice. You can emulate only one race
at a time.

*Use a Scroll:* If you are casting a spell from a scroll, you have to
decipher it first. Normally, to cast a spell from a scroll, you must
have the scroll's spell on your class spell list. Use Magic Device
allows you to use a scroll as if you had a particular spell on your
class spell list. The DC is equal to 20 + the caster level of the spell
you are trying to cast from the scroll. In addition, casting a spell
from a scroll requires a minimum score (10 + spell level) in the
appropriate ability. If you don't have a sufficient score in that
ability, you must emulate the ability score with a separate Use Magic
Device check (see above).

This use of the skill also applies to other spell completion magic
items.

*Use a Wand:* Normally, to use a wand, you must have the wand's spell on
your class spell list. This use of the skill allows you to use a wand as
if you had a particular spell on your class spell list. This use of the
skill also applies to other spell trigger magic items, such as staffs.

**Action:** None. The Use Magic Device check is made as part of the
action (if any) required to activate the magic item.

**Try Again:** Yes, but if you ever roll a natural 1 while attempting to
activate an item and you fail, then you can't try to activate that item
again for 24 hours.

**Special:** You cannot take 10 with this skill.

You can't aid another on Use Magic Device checks. Only the user of the
item may attempt such a check.

If you have the Magical Aptitude feat, you get a +2 bonus on Use Magic
Device checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Spellcraft, you get a +2
bonus on Use Magic Device checks related to scrolls.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Decipher Script, you get a +2 bonus on
Use Magic Device checks related to scrolls.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Use Magic Device, you get a +2 bonus to
Spellcraft checks made to decipher spells on scrolls.

## Use Rope 
***Key Ability: (keyAbility::(Dex))***

**Check:** Most tasks with a rope are relatively simple. The DCs for
various tasks utilizing this skill are summarized on the table below.

|Use Rope DC|Task|
|---|---|
|10|Tie a firm knot|
|10<sup style="font-weight: 700">1</sup>|Secure a grappling hook|
|15|Tie a special knot, such as one that slips, slides slowly, or loosens with a tug|
|15|Tie a rope around yourself one-handed|
|15|Splice two ropes together|
|Varies|Bind a character|
|1 Add 2 to the DC for every 10 feet the hook is thrown; see below.|

*Secure a Grappling Hook:* Securing a grappling hook requires a Use Rope
check (DC 10, +2 for every 10 feet of distance the grappling hook is
thrown, to a maximum DC of 20 at 50 feet). Failure by 4 or less
indicates that the hook fails to catch and falls, allowing you to try
again. Failure by 5 or more indicates that the grappling hook initially
holds, but comes loose after 1d4 rounds of supporting weight. This check
is made secretly, so that you don't know whether the rope will hold your
weight.

*Bind a Character:* When you bind another character with a rope, any
Escape Artist check that the bound character makes is opposed by your
Use Rope check.

You get a +10 bonus on this check because it is easier to bind someone
than to escape from bonds. You don't even make your Use Rope check until
someone tries to escape.

**Action:** Varies. Throwing a grappling hook is a standard action that
provokes an attack of opportunity. Tying a knot, tying a special knot,
or tying a rope around yourself one-handed is a full-round action that
provokes an attack of opportunity. Splicing two ropes together takes 5
minutes. Binding a character takes 1 minute.

**Special:** A silk rope gives you a +2 circumstance bonus on Use Rope
checks. If you cast an *animate rope* spell on a rope, you get a +2
circumstance bonus on any Use Rope checks you make when using that rope.

These bonuses stack.

If you have the Deft Hands feat, you get a +2 bonus on Use Rope checks.

**Synergy:** If you have 5 or more ranks in Use Rope, you get a +2 bonus
on Climb checks made to climb a rope, a knotted rope, or a rope-and-wall
combination.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Use Rope, you get a +2 bonus on Escape
Artist checks when escaping from rope bonds.

If you have 5 or more ranks in Escape Artist, you get a +2 bonus on
checks made to bind someone.

