---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Basic Rules and Legal / Feats
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
aliases: [3.5 Feat List]
tags: 3-5e/basic-rules-and-legal/feat-list
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# FEATS

## Table of Contents

-   [[#Prerequisites]]
-   [[#Types of Feats]]
    -   [[#Fighter Bonus Feats]]
    -   [[#Item Creation Feats]]
    -   [[#Metamagic Feats]]
-   [[#Feat Descriptions]]
    -   [[#Feat Name ]]
    -   [[#Acrobatic ]]
    -   [[#Agile ]]
    -   [[#Alertness ]]
    -   [[#Animal Affinity ]]
    -   [[#Armor Proficiency (Heavy) ]]
    -   [[#Armor Proficiency (Light)  ]]
    -   [[#Armor Proficiency (Medium) ]]
    -   [[#Athletic ]]
    -   [[#Augment Summoning ]]
    -   [[#Blind-Fight ]]
    -   [[#Brew Potion ]]
    -   [[#Cleave ]]
    -   [[#Combat Casting ]]
    -   [[#Combat Expertise ]]
    -   [[#Combat Reflexes ]]
    -   [[#Craft Magic Arms and Armor ]]
    -   [[#Craft Rod ]]
    -   [[#Craft Staff ]]
    -   [[#Craft Wand ]]
    -   [[#Craft Wondrous Item ]]
    -   [[#Deceitful ]]
    -   [[#Deflect Arrows ]]
    -   [[#Deft Hands ]]
    -   [[#Diehard ]]
    -   [[#Diligent ]]
    -   [[#Dodge ]]
    -   [[#Empower Spell ]]
    -   [[#Endurance ]]
    -   [[#Enlarge Spell ]]
    -   [[#Eschew Materials ]]
    -   [[#Exotic Weapon Proficiency ]]
    -   [[#Extend Spell ]]
    -   [[#Extra Turning ]]
    -   [[#Far Shot ]]
    -   [[#Forge Ring ]]
    -   [[#Great Cleave ]]
    -   [[#Great Fortitude ]]
    -   [[#Greater Spell Focus ]]
    -   [[#Greater Spell Penetration]]
    -   [[#Greater Two-Weapon Fighting ]]
    -   [[#Greater Weapon Focus ]]
    -   [[#Greater Weapon Specialization ]]
    -   [[#Heighten Spell ]]
    -   [[#Improved Bull Rush ]]
    -   [[#Improved Counterspell ]]
    -   [[#Improved Critical ]]
    -   [[#Improved Disarm ]]
    -   [[#Improved Familiar ]]
    -   [[#Improved Feint ]]
    -   [[#Improved Grapple ]]
    -   [[#Improved Initiative ]]
    -   [[#Improved Overrun ]]
    -   [[#Improved Precise Shot ]]
    -   [[#Improved Shield Bash ]]
    -   [[#Improved Sunder ]]
    -   [[#Improved Trip ]]
    -   [[#Improved Turning ]]
    -   [[#Improved Two-Weapon Fighting ]]
    -   [[#Improved Unarmed Strike ]]
    -   [[#Investigator ]]
    -   [[#Iron Will ]]
    -   [[#Leadership ]]
    -   [[#Lightning Reflexes ]]
    -   [[#Magical Aptitude ]]
    -   [[#Manyshot ]]
    -   [[#Martial Weapon Proficiency ]]
    -   [[#Maximize Spell ]]
    -   [[#Mobility ]]
    -   [[#Mounted Archery ]]
    -   [[#Mounted Combat ]]
    -   [[#Natural Spell ]]
    -   [[#Negotiator ]]
    -   [[#Nimble Fingers ]]
    -   [[#Persuasive ]]
    -   [[#Point Blank Shot ]]
    -   [[#Power Attack ]]
    -   [[#Precise Shot ]]
    -   [[#Quick Draw ]]
    -   [[#Quicken Spell ]]
    -   [[#Rapid Reload ]]
    -   [[#Rapid Shot ]]
    -   [[#Ride-by Attack ]]
    -   [[#Run ]]
    -   [[#Scribe Scroll ]]
    -   [[#Self-Sufficient ]]
    -   [[#Shield Proficiency ]]
    -   [[#Shot on the Run ]]
    -   [[#Silent Spell ]]
    -   [[#Simple Weapon Proficiency ]]
    -   [[#Skill Focus ]]
    -   [[#Snatch Arrows ]]
    -   [[#Spell Focus ]]
    -   [[#Spell Mastery ]]
    -   [[#Spell Penetration ]]
    -   [[#Spirited Charge ]]
    -   [[#Spring Attack ]]
    -   [[#Stealthy ]]
    -   [[#Still Spell ]]
    -   [[#Stunning Fist ]]
    -   [[#Toughness ]]
    -   [[#Tower Shield Proficiency ]]
    -   [[#Track ]]
    -   [[#Trample ]]
    -   [[#Two-Weapon Defense ]]
    -   [[#Two-Weapon Fighting ]]
    -   [[#Weapon Finesse ]]
    -   [[#Weapon Focus ]]
    -   [[#Weapon Specialization ]]
    -   [[#Whirlwind Attack ]]
    -   [[#Widen Spell ]]

## Prerequisites

Some feats have prerequisites. Your character must have the indicated
ability score, class feature, feat, skill, base attack bonus, or other
quality designated in order to select or use that feat. A character can
gain a feat at the same level at which he or she gains the prerequisite.

A character can't use a feat if he or she has lost a prerequisite.

## Types of Feats

Some feats are general, meaning that no special rules govern them as a
group. Others are item creation feats, which allow spellcasters to
create magic items of all sorts. A metamagic feat lets a spellcaster
prepare and cast a spell with greater effect, albeit as if the spell
were a higher spell level than it actually is.

### Fighter Bonus Feats

Any feat designated as a fighter feat can be selected as a fighter's
bonus feat. This designation does not restrict characters of other
classes from selecting these feats, assuming that they meet any
prerequisites.

### Item Creation Feats

An item creation feat lets a spellcaster create a magic item of a
certain type. Regardless of the type of items they involve, the various
item creation feats all have certain features in common.

**XP Cost:** Experience that the spellcaster would normally keep is
expended when making a magic item. The XP cost equals 1/25 of the cost
of the item in gold pieces. A character cannot spend so much XP on an
item that he or she loses a level. However, upon gaining enough XP to
attain a new level, he or she can immediately expend XP on creating an
item rather than keeping the XP to advance a level.

**Raw Materials Cost:** The cost of creating a magic item equals
one-half the sale cost of the item.

Using an item creation feat also requires access to a laboratory or
magical workshop, special tools, and so on. A character generally has
access to what he or she needs unless unusual circumstances apply.

**Time:** The time to create a magic item depends on the feat and the
cost of the item. The minimum time is one day.

**Item Cost:** Brew Potion, Craft Wand, and Scribe Scroll create items
that directly reproduce spell effects, and the power of these items
depends on their caster level---that is, a spell from such an item has
the power it would have if cast by a spellcaster of that level. The
price of these items (and thus the XP cost and the cost of the raw
materials) also depends on the caster level. The caster level must be
high enough that the spellcaster creating the item can cast the spell at
that level. To find the final price in each case, multiply the caster
level by the spell level, then multiply the result by a constant, as
shown below:

*Scrolls:* Base price = spell level x caster level x 25 gp.

*Potions:* Base price = spell level x caster level x 50 gp.

*Wands:* Base price = spell level x caster level x 750 gp.

A 0-level spell is considered to have a spell level of 1/2 for the
purpose of this calculation.

**Extra Costs:** Any potion, scroll, or wand that stores a spell with a
costly material component or an XP cost also carries a commensurate
cost. For potions and scrolls, the creator must expend the material
component or pay the XP cost when creating the item.

For a wand, the creator must expend fifty copies of the material
component or pay fifty times the XP cost.

Some magic items similarly incur extra costs in material components or
XP, as noted in their descriptions.

### Metamagic Feats

As a spellcaster's knowledge of magic grows, she can learn to cast
spells in ways slightly different from the ways in which the spells were
originally designed or learned. Preparing and casting a spell in such a
way is harder than normal but, thanks to metamagic feats, at least it is
possible. Spells modified by a metamagic feat use a spell slot higher
than normal. This does not change the level of the spell, so the DC for
saving throws against it does not go up.

**Wizards and Divine Spellcasters:** Wizards and divine spellcasters
must prepare their spells in advance. During preparation, the character
chooses which spells to prepare with metamagic feats (and thus which
ones take up higher-level spell slots than normal).

**Sorcerers and Bards:** Sorcerers and bards choose spells as they cast
them. They can choose when they cast their spells whether to apply their
metamagic feats to improve them. As with other spellcasters, the
improved spell uses up a higher-level spell slot. But because the
sorcerer or bard has not prepared the spell in a metamagic form in
advance, he must apply the metamagic feat on the spot. Therefore, such a
character must also take more time to cast a metamagic spell (one
enhanced by a metamagic feat) than he does to cast a regular spell. If
the spell's normal casting time is 1 action, casting a metamagic version
is a full-round action for a sorcerer or bard. (This isn't the same as a
1-round casting time.)

For a spell with a longer casting time, it takes an extra full-round
action to cast the spell.

**Spontaneous Casting and Metamagic Feats:** A cleric spontaneously
casting a *cure* or *inflict* spell can cast a metamagic version of it
instead. Extra time is also required in this case. Casting a 1-action
metamagic spell spontaneously is a full-round action, and a spell with a
longer casting time takes an extra full-round action to cast.

**Effects of Metamagic Feats on a Spell:** In all ways, a metamagic
spell operates at its original spell level, even though it is prepared
and cast as a higher-level spell. Saving throw modifications are not
changed unless stated otherwise in the feat description.

The modifications made by these feats only apply to spells cast directly
by the feat user. A spellcaster can't use a metamagic feat to alter a
spell being cast from a wand, scroll, or other device.

Metamagic feats that eliminate components of a spell don't eliminate the
attack of opportunity provoked by casting a spell while threatened.
However, casting a spell modified by Quicken Spell does not provoke an
attack of opportunity.

Metamagic feats cannot be used with all spells. See the specific feat
descriptions for the spells that a particular feat can't modify.

**Multiple Metamagic Feats on a Spell:** A spellcaster can apply
multiple metamagic feats to a single spell. Changes to its level are
cumulative. You can't apply the same metamagic feat more than once to a
single spell.

**Magic Items and Metamagic Spells:** With the right item creation feat,
you can store a metamagic version of a spell in a scroll, potion, or
wand. Level limits for potions and wands apply to the spell's higher
spell level (after the application of the metamagic feat). A character
doesn't need the metamagic feat to activate an item storing a metamagic
version of a spell.

**Counterspelling Metamagic Spells:** Whether or not a spell has been
enhanced by a metamagic feat does not affect its vulnerability to
counterspelling or its ability to counterspell another spell.

## Feat Descriptions

Here is the format for feat descriptions.

### Feat Name 
***Feat Type: (featType::Type of Feat)***

**Prerequisite:** A minimum ability score, another feat or feats, a
minimum base attack bonus, a minimum number of ranks in one or more
skills, or a class level that a character must have in order to acquire
this feat. This entry is absent if a feat has no prerequisite. A feat
may have more than one prerequisite.

**Benefit:** What the feat enables the character ("you" in the feat
description) to do. If a character has the same feat more than once, its
benefits do not stack unless indicated otherwise in the description.

In general, having a feat twice is the same as having it once.

**Normal:** What a character who does not have this feat is limited to
or restricted from doing. If not having the feat causes no particular
drawback, this entry is absent.

**Special:** Additional facts about the feat that may be helpful when
you decide whether to acquire the feat.

### Acrobatic 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Jump checks and Tumble checks.

### Agile 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Balance checks and Escape Artist
checks.

### Alertness 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Listen checks and Spot checks.

**Special:** The master of a familiar gains the benefit of the Alertness
feat whenever the familiar is within arm's reach.

### Animal Affinity 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Handle Animal checks and Ride
checks.

### Armor Proficiency (Heavy) 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Armor Proficiency (light), Armor Proficiency
(medium).

**Benefit:** See Armor Proficiency (light).

**Normal:** See Armor Proficiency (light).

**Special:** Fighters, paladins, and clerics automatically have Armor
Proficiency (heavy) as a bonus feat. They need not select it.

### Armor Proficiency (Light) 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** When you wear a type of armor with which you are
proficient, the armor check penalty for that armor applies only to
Balance, Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Sleight of
Hand, and Tumble checks.

**Normal:** A character who is wearing armor with which she is not
proficient applies its armor check penalty to attack rolls and to all
skill checks that involve moving, including Ride.

**Special:** All characters except wizards, sorcerers, and monks
automatically have Armor Proficiency (light) as a bonus feat. They need
not select it.

### Armor Proficiency (Medium) 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Armor Proficiency (light).

**Benefit:** See Armor Proficiency (light).

**Normal:** See Armor Proficiency (light).

**Special:** Fighters, barbarians, paladins, clerics, druids, and bards
automatically have Armor Proficiency (medium) as a bonus feat. They need
not select it.

### Athletic 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Climb checks and Swim checks.

### Augment Summoning 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Spell Focus (conjuration).

**Benefit:** Each creature you conjure with any *summon* spell gains a
+4 enhancement bonus to Strength and Constitution for the duration of
the spell that summoned it.

### Blind-Fight 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** In melee, every time you miss because of concealment, you
can reroll your miss chance percentile roll one time to see if you
actually hit.

An invisible attacker gets no advantages related to hitting you in
melee. That is, you don't lose your Dexterity bonus to Armor Class, and
the attacker doesn't get the usual +2 bonus for being invisible. The
invisible attacker's bonuses do still apply for ranged attacks, however.

You take only half the usual penalty to speed for being unable to see.
Darkness and poor visibility in general reduces your speed to
three-quarters normal, instead of one-half.

**Normal:** Regular attack roll modifiers for invisible attackers trying
to hit you apply, and you lose your Dexterity bonus to AC. The speed
reduction for darkness and poor visibility also applies.

**Special:** The Blind-Fight feat is of no use against a character who
is the subject of a *blink* spell.

A fighter may select Blind-Fight as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Brew Potion 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 3rd.

**Benefit:** You can create a potion of any 3rd-level or lower spell
that you know and that targets one or more creatures. Brewing a potion
takes one day. When you create a potion, you set the caster level, which
must be sufficient to cast the spell in question and no higher than your
own level. The base price of a potion is its spell level x its caster
level x 50 gp. To brew a potion, you must spend 1/25 of this base price
in XP and use up raw materials costing one half this base price.

When you create a potion, you make any choices that you would normally
make when casting the spell. Whoever drinks the potion is the target of
the spell.

Any potion that stores a spell with a costly material component or an XP
cost also carries a commensurate cost. In addition to the costs derived
from the base price, you must expend the material component or pay the
XP when creating the potion.

### Cleave 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Str 13, Power Attack.

**Benefit:** If you deal a creature enough damage to make it drop
(typically by dropping it to below 0 hit points or killing it), you get
an immediate, extra melee attack against another creature within reach.
You cannot take a 5-foot step before making this extra attack. The extra
attack is with the same weapon and at the same bonus as the attack that
dropped the previous creature. You can use this ability once per round.

**Special:** A fighter may select Cleave as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Combat Casting 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +4 bonus on Concentration checks made to cast a
spell or use a spell-like ability while on the defensive or while you
are grappling or pinned.

### Combat Expertise 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Int 13.

**Benefit:** When you use the attack action or the full attack action in
melee, you can take a penalty of as much as --5 on your attack roll and
add the same number (+5 or less) as a dodge bonus to your Armor Class.
This number may not exceed your base attack bonus. The changes to attack
rolls and Armor Class last until your next action.

**Normal:** A character without the Combat Expertise feat can fight
defensively while using the attack or full attack action to take a --4
penalty on attack rolls and gain a +2 dodge bonus to Armor Class.

**Special:** A fighter may select Combat Expertise as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Combat Reflexes 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You may make a number of additional attacks of opportunity
equal to your Dexterity bonus.

With this feat, you may also make attacks of opportunity while
flat-footed.

**Normal:** A character without this feat can make only one attack of
opportunity per round and can't make attacks of opportunity while
flat-footed.

**Special:** The Combat Reflexes feat does not allow a rogue to use her
opportunist ability more than once per round.

A fighter may select Combat Reflexes as one of his fighter bonus feats.

A monk may select Combat Reflexes as a bonus feat at 2nd level.

### Craft Magic Arms and Armor 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 5th.

**Benefit:** You can create any magic weapon, armor, or shield whose
prerequisites you meet. Enhancing a weapon, suit of armor, or shield
takes one day for each 1,000 gp in the price of its magical features. To
enhance a weapon, suit of armor, or shield, you must spend 1/25 of its
features' total price in XP and use up raw materials costing one-half of
this total price.

The weapon, armor, or shield to be enhanced must be a masterwork item
that you provide. Its cost is not included in the above cost.

You can also mend a broken magic weapon, suit of armor, or shield if it
is one that you could make. Doing so costs half the XP, half the raw
materials, and half the time it would take to craft that item in the
first place.

### Craft Rod 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 9th.

**Benefit:** You can create any rod whose prerequisites you meet.
Crafting a rod takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its base price. To
craft a rod, you must spend 1/25 of its base price in XP and use up raw
materials costing one-half of its base price.

Some rods incur extra costs in material components or XP, as noted in
their descriptions. These costs are in addition to those derived from
the rod's base price.

### Craft Staff 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 12th.

**Benefit:** You can create any staff whose prerequisites you meet.

Crafting a staff takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its base price. To
craft a staff, you must spend 1/25 of its base price in XP and use up
raw materials costing one-half of its base price. A newly created staff
has 50 charges.

Some staffs incur extra costs in material components or XP, as noted in
their descriptions. These costs are in addition to those derived from
the staff 's base price.

### Craft Wand 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 5th.

**Benefit:** You can create a wand of any 4th-level or lower spell that
you know. Crafting a wand takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its base
price. The base price of a wand is its caster level x the spell level x
750 gp. To craft a wand, you must spend 1/25 of this base price in XP
and use up raw materials costing one-half of this base price. A newly
created wand has 50 charges.

Any wand that stores a spell with a costly material component or an XP
cost also carries a commensurate cost. In addition to the cost derived
from the base price, you must expend fifty copies of the material
component or pay fifty times the XP cost.

### Craft Wondrous Item 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 3rd.

**Benefit:** You can create any wondrous item whose prerequisites you
meet. Enchanting a wondrous item takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its
price. To enchant a wondrous item, you must spend 1/25 of the item's
price in XP and use up raw materials costing half of this price.

You can also mend a broken wondrous item if it is one that you could
make. Doing so costs half the XP, half the raw materials, and half the
time it would take to craft that item in the first place.

Some wondrous items incur extra costs in material components or XP, as
noted in their descriptions. These costs are in addition to those
derived from the item's base price. You must pay such a cost to create
an item or to mend a broken one.

### Deceitful 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Disguise checks and Forgery
checks.

### Deflect Arrows 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Improved Unarmed Strike.

**Benefit:** You must have at least one hand free (holding nothing) to
use this feat. Once per round when you would normally be hit with a
ranged weapon, you may deflect it so that you take no damage from it.
You must be aware of the attack and not flatfooted.

Attempting to deflect a ranged weapon doesn't count as an action.
Unusually massive ranged weapons and ranged attacks generated by spell
effects can't be deflected.

**Special:** A monk may select Deflect Arrows as a bonus feat at 2nd
level, even if she does not meet the prerequisites.

A fighter may select Deflect Arrows as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Deft Hands 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Sleight of Hand checks and Use
Rope checks.

### Diehard 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Endurance.

**Benefit:** When reduced to between --1 and --9 hit points, you
automatically become stable. You don't have to roll d% to see if you
lose 1 hit point each round.

When reduced to negative hit points, you may choose to act as if you
were disabled, rather than dying. You must make this decision as soon as
you are reduced to negative hit points (even if it isn't your turn). If
you do not choose to act as if you were disabled, you immediately fall
unconscious.

When using this feat, you can take either a single move or standard
action each turn, but not both, and you cannot take a full round action.
You can take a move action without further injuring yourself, but if you
perform any standard action (or any other action deemed as strenuous,
including some free actions, such as casting a quickened spell) you take
1 point of damage after completing the act. If you reach --10 hit
points, you immediately die.

**Normal:** A character without this feat who is reduced to between --1
and --9 hit points is unconscious and dying.

### Diligent 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Appraise checks and Decipher
Script checks.

### Dodge 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Dex 13.

**Benefit:** During your action, you designate an opponent and receive a
+1 dodge bonus to Armor Class against attacks from that opponent. You
can select a new opponent on any action.

A condition that makes you lose your Dexterity bonus to Armor Class (if
any) also makes you lose dodge bonuses. Also, dodge bonuses stack with
each other, unlike most other types of bonuses.

**Special:** A fighter may select Dodge as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Empower Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** All variable, numeric effects of an empowered spell are
increased by one-half.

Saving throws and opposed rolls are not affected, nor are spells without
random variables. An empowered spell uses up a spell slot two levels
higher than the spell's actual level.

### Endurance 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You gain a +4 bonus on the following checks and saves: Swim
checks made to resist nonlethal damage, Constitution checks made to
continue running, Constitution checks made to avoid nonlethal damage
from a forced march, Constitution checks made to hold your breath,
Constitution checks made to avoid nonlethal damage from starvation or
thirst, Fortitude saves made to avoid nonlethal damage from hot or cold
environments, and Fortitude saves made to resist damage from
suffocation. Also, you may sleep in light or medium armor without
becoming fatigued.

**Normal:** A character without this feat who sleeps in medium or
heavier armor is automatically fatigued the next day.

**Special:** A ranger automatically gains Endurance as a bonus feat at
3rd level. He need not select it.

### Enlarge Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** You can alter a spell with a range of close, medium, or
long to increase its range by 100%. An enlarged spell with a range of
close now has a range of 50 ft. + 5 ft./level, while medium-range spells
have a range of 200 ft. + 20 ft./level and long-range spells have a
range of 800 ft. + 80 ft./level. An enlarged spell uses up a spell slot
one level higher than the spell's actual level.

Spells whose ranges are not defined by distance, as well as spells whose
ranges are not close, medium, or long, do not have increased ranges.

### Eschew Materials 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You can cast any spell that has a material component
costing 1 gp or less without needing that component. (The casting of the
spell still provokes attacks of opportunity as normal.) If the spell
requires a material component that costs more than 1 gp, you must have
the material component at hand to cast the spell, just as normal.

### Exotic Weapon Proficiency 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose a type of exotic weapon. You understand how to use that type of
exotic weapon in combat.

**Prerequisite:** Base attack bonus +1 (plus Str 13 for bastard sword or
dwarven waraxe).

**Benefit:** You make attack rolls with the weapon normally.

**Normal:** A character who uses a weapon with which he or she is not
proficient takes a --4 penalty on attack rolls.

**Special:** You can gain Exotic Weapon Proficiency multiple times. Each
time you take the feat, it applies to a new type of exotic weapon.
Proficiency with the bastard sword or the dwarven waraxe has an
additional prerequisite of Str 13.

A fighter may select Exotic Weapon Proficiency as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Extend Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** An extended spell lasts twice as long as normal. A spell
with a duration of concentration, instantaneous, or permanent is not
affected by this feat. An extended spell uses up a spell slot one level
higher than the spell's actual level.

### Extra Turning 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Ability to turn or rebuke creatures.

**Benefit:** Each time you take this feat, you can use your ability to
turn or rebuke creatures four more times per day than normal.

If you have the ability to turn or rebuke more than one kind of creature
each of your turning or rebuking abilities gains four additional uses
per day.

**Normal:** Without this feat, a character can typically turn or rebuke
undead (or other creatures) a number of times per day equal to 3 + his
or her Charisma modifier.

**Special:** You can gain Extra Turning multiple times. Its effects
stack. Each time you take the feat, you can use each of your turning or
rebuking abilities four additional times per day.

### Far Shot 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Point Blank Shot.

**Benefit:** When you use a projectile weapon, such as a bow, its range
increment increases by one-half (multiply by 1-1/2). When you use a
thrown weapon, its range increment is doubled.

**Special:** A fighter may select Far Shot as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Forge Ring 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 12th.

**Benefit:** You can create any ring whose prerequisites you meet.
Crafting a ring takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its base price. To
craft a ring, you must spend 1/25 of its base price in XP and use up raw
materials costing one-half of its base price.

You can also mend a broken ring if it is one that you could make. Doing
so costs half the XP, half the raw materials, and half the time it would
take to forge that ring in the first place.

Some magic rings incur extra costs in material components or XP, as
noted in their descriptions. You must pay such a cost to forge such a
ring or to mend a broken one.

### Great Cleave 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Str 13, Cleave, Power Attack, base attack bonus +4.

**Benefit:** This feat works like Cleave, except that there is no limit
to the number of times you can use it per round.

**Special:** A fighter may select Great Cleave as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Great Fortitude 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Fortitude saving throws.

### Greater Spell Focus 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose a school of magic to which you already have applied the Spell
Focus feat.

**Benefit:** Add +1 to the Difficulty Class for all saving throws
against spells from the school of magic you select. This bonus stacks
with the bonus from Spell Focus.

**Special:** You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects do not
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new school of magic
to which you already have applied the Spell Focus feat.

### Greater Spell Penetration 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Spell Penetration.

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on caster level checks (1d20 + caster
level) made to overcome a creature's spell resistance. This bonus stacks
with the one from Spell Penetration.

### Greater Two-Weapon Fighting 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 19, Improved Two-Weapon Fighting, Two-Weapon
Fighting, base attack bonus +11.

**Benefit:** You get a third attack with your off-hand weapon, albeit at
a --10 penalty.

**Special:** A fighter may select Greater Two-Weapon Fighting as one of
his fighter bonus feats.

An 11th-level ranger who has chosen the two-weapon combat style is
treated as having Greater Two-Weapon Fighting, even if he does not have
the prerequisites for it, but only when he is wearing light or no armor.

### Greater Weapon Focus 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose one type of weapon for which you have already selected Weapon
Focus. You can also choose unarmed strike or grapple as your weapon for
purposes of this feat.

**Prerequisites:** Proficiency with selected weapon, Weapon Focus with
selected weapon, fighter level 8th.

**Benefit:** You gain a +1 bonus on all attack rolls you make using the
selected weapon. This bonus stacks with other bonuses on attack rolls,
including the one from Weapon Focus (see below).

**Special:** You can gain Greater Weapon Focus multiple times. Its
effects do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new
type of weapon.

A fighter must have Greater Weapon Focus with a given weapon to gain the
Greater Weapon Specialization feat for that weapon.

A fighter may select Greater Weapon Focus as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Greater Weapon Specialization 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose one type of weapon for which you have already selected Weapon
Specialization. You can also choose unarmed strike or grapple as your
weapon for purposes of this feat.

**Prerequisites:** Proficiency with selected weapon, Greater Weapon
Focus with selected weapon, Weapon Focus with selected weapon, Weapon
Specialization with selected weapon, fighter level 12th.

**Benefit:** You gain a +2 bonus on all damage rolls you make using the
selected weapon. This bonus stacks with other bonuses on damage rolls,
including the one from Weapon Specialization (see below).

**Special:** You can gain Greater Weapon Specialization multiple times.
Its effects do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a
new type of weapon.

A fighter may select Greater Weapon Specialization as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Heighten Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** A heightened spell has a higher spell level than normal (up
to a maximum of 9th level). Unlike other metamagic feats, Heighten Spell
actually increases the effective level of the spell that it modifies.
All effects dependent on spell level (such as saving throw DCs and
ability to penetrate a *lesser globe of invulnerability*) are calculated
according to the heightened level. The heightened spell is as difficult
to prepare and cast as a spell of its effective level.

### Improved Bull Rush 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Str 13, Power Attack.

**Benefit:** When you perform a bull rush you do not provoke an attack
of opportunity from the defender. You also gain a +4 bonus on the
opposed Strength check you make to push back the defender.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Bull Rush as one of his
fighter bonus feats.

### Improved Counterspell 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** When counterspelling, you may use a spell of the same
school that is one or more spell levels higher than the target spell.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you may counter a spell only with the
same spell or with a spell specifically designated as countering the
target spell.

### Improved Critical 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose one type of weapon.

**Prerequisite:** Proficient with weapon, base attack bonus +8.

**Benefit:** When using the weapon you selected, your threat range is
doubled.

**Special:** You can gain Improved Critical multiple times. The effects
do not stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new type of
weapon.

This effect doesn't stack with any other effect that expands the threat
range of a weapon.

A fighter may select Improved Critical as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Improved Disarm 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Int 13, Combat Expertise.

**Benefit:** You do not provoke an attack of opportunity when you
attempt to disarm an opponent, nor does the opponent have a chance to
disarm you. You also gain a +4 bonus on the opposed attack roll you make
to disarm your opponent.

**Normal:** See the normal disarm rules.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Disarm as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

A monk may select Improved Disarm as a bonus feat at 6th level, even if
she does not meet the prerequisites.

### Improved Familiar 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

This feat allows spellcasters to acquire a new familiar from a
nonstandard list, but only when they could normally acquire a new
familiar.

**Prerequisites:** Ability to acquire a new familiar, compatible
alignment, sufficiently high level (see below).

**Benefit:** When choosing a familiar, the creatures listed below are
also available to the spellcaster. The spellcaster may choose a familiar
with an alignment up to one step away on each of the alignment axes
(lawful through chaotic, good through evil).

| **Familiar**   | **Alignment**  | **Arcane Spellcaster Level** |
| -------------- | -------------- | ---------------------------- |
| Shocker lizard | Neutral        | 5th                          |
| Stirge         | Neutral        | 5th                          |
| Formian worker | Lawful neutral | 7th                          |
| Imp            | Lawful evil    | 7th                          |
| Pseudodragon   | Neutral good   | 7th                          |
| Quasit         | Chaotic evil   | 7th                          |

Improved familiars otherwise use the rules for regular familiars, with
two exceptions: If the creature's type is something other than animal,
its type does not change; and improved familiars do not gain the ability
to speak with other creatures of their kind (although many of them
already have the ability to communicate).

The list in the table above presents only a few possible improved
familiars. Almost any creature of the same general size and power as
those on the list makes a suitable familiar. Nor is the master's
alignment the only possible categorization. For instance, improved
familiars could be assigned by the master's creature type or subtype, as
shown below.

| **Familiar**                                                                                                                   | **Type/Subtype** | Arcane Spellcaster Level |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ---------------- | ------------------------ |
| Celestial hawk**1**                                                                                                            | Good             | 3rd                      |
| Fiendish Tiny viper snake**2**                                                                                                 | Evil             | 3rd                      |
| Air elemental, Small                                                                                                           | Air              | 5th                      |
| Earth elemental, Small                                                                                                         | Earth            | 5th                      |
| Fire elemental, Small                                                                                                          | Fire             | 5th                      |
| Shocker lizard                                                                                                                 | Electricity      | 5th                      |
| Water elemental, Small                                                                                                         | Water            | 5th                      |
| Homunculus**3**                                                                                                                | Undead           | 7th                      |
| Ice mephit                                                                                                                     | Cold             | 7th                      |
| 1 Or other celestial animal from the standard familiar list.                                                                   |                  |                          |
| 2 Or other fiendish animal from the standard familiar list.                                                                    |                  |                          |
| 3 The master must first create the homunculus, substituting ichor or another part of the master’s body for blood if necessary. |                  |                          |

### Improved Feint 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Int 13, Combat Expertise.

**Benefit:** You can make a Bluff check to feint in combat as a move
action.

**Normal:** Feinting in combat is a standard action.

A fighter may select Improved Feint as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Improved Grapple 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Improved Unarmed Strike.

**Benefit:** You do not provoke an attack of opportunity when you make a
touch attack to start a grapple. You also gain a +4 bonus on all grapple
checks, regardless of whether you started the grapple.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you provoke an attack of opportunity when
you make a touch attack to start a grapple.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Grapple as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

A monk may select Improved Grapple as a bonus feat at 1st level, even if
she does not meet the prerequisites.

### Improved Initiative 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +4 bonus on initiative checks.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Initiative as one of his
fighter bonus feats.

### Improved Overrun 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Str 13, Power Attack.

**Benefit:** When you attempt to overrun an opponent, the target may not
choose to avoid you. You also gain a +4 bonus on your Strength check to
knock down your opponent.

**Normal:** Without this feat, the target of an overrun can choose to
avoid you or to block you.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Overrun as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Improved Precise Shot 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 19, Point Blank Shot, Precise Shot, base attack
bonus +11.

**Benefit:** Your ranged attacks ignore the AC bonus granted to targets
by anything less than total cover, and the miss chance granted to
targets by anything less than total concealment. Total cover and total
concealment provide their normal benefits against your ranged attacks.

In addition, when you shoot or throw ranged weapons at a grappling
opponent, you automatically strike at the opponent you have chosen.

**Normal:** See the normal rules on the effects of cover and
concealment. Without this feat, a character who shoots or throws a
ranged weapon at a target involved in a grapple must roll randomly to
see which grappling combatant the attack strikes.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Precise Shot as one of his
fighter bonus feats.

An 11th-level ranger who has chosen the archery combat style is treated
as having Improved Precise Shot, even if he does not have the
prerequisites for it, but only when he is wearing light or no armor.

### Improved Shield Bash 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Shield Proficiency.

**Benefit:** When you perform a shield bash, you may still apply the
shield's shield bonus to your AC.

**Normal:** Without this feat, a character who performs a shield bash
loses the shield's shield bonus to AC until his or her next turn.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Shield Bash as one of his
fighter bonus feats.

### Improved Sunder 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Str 13, Power Attack.

**Benefit:** When you strike at an object held or carried by an opponent
(such as a weapon or shield), you do not provoke an attack of
opportunity.

You also gain a +4 bonus on any attack roll made to attack an object
held or carried by another character.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you provoke an attack of opportunity when
you strike at an object held or carried by another character.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Sunder as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Improved Trip 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Int 13, Combat Expertise.

**Benefit:** You do not provoke an attack of opportunity when you
attempt to trip an opponent while you are unarmed. You also gain a +4
bonus on your Strength check to trip your opponent.

If you trip an opponent in melee combat, you immediately get a melee
attack against that opponent as if you hadn't used your attack for the
trip attempt.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you provoke an attack of opportunity when
you attempt to trip an opponent while you are unarmed.

**Special:** At 6th level, a monk may select Improved Trip as a bonus
feat, even if she does not have the prerequisites.

A fighter may select Improved Trip as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Improved Turning 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Ability to turn or rebuke creatures.

**Benefit:** You turn or rebuke creatures as if you were one level
higher than you are in the class that grants you the ability.

### Improved Two-Weapon Fighting 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 17, Two-Weapon Fighting, base attack bonus +6.

**Benefit:** In addition to the standard single extra attack you get
with an off-hand weapon, you get a second attack with it, albeit at a
--5 penalty.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you can only get a single extra attack
with an off-hand weapon.

**Special:** A fighter may select Improved Two-Weapon Fighting as one of
his fighter bonus feats.

A 6th-level ranger who has chosen the two-weapon combat style is treated
as having Improved Two-Weapon Fighting, even if he does not have the
prerequisites for it, but only when he is wearing light or no armor.

### Improved Unarmed Strike 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You are considered to be armed even when unarmed ---that
is, you do not provoke attacks or opportunity from armed opponents when
you attack them while unarmed. However, you still get an attack of
opportunity against any opponent who makes an unarmed attack on you.

In addition, your unarmed strikes can deal lethal or nonlethal damage,
at your option.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you are considered unarmed when attacking
with an unarmed strike, and you can deal only nonlethal damage with such
an attack.

**Special:** A monk automatically gains Improved Unarmed Strike as a
bonus feat at 1st level. She need not select it.

A fighter may select Improved Unarmed Strike as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Investigator 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Gather Information checks and
Search checks.

### Iron Will 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Will saving throws.

### Leadership 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Character level 6th.

**Benefits:** Having this feat enables the character to attract loyal
companions and devoted followers, subordinates who assist her. See the
table below for what sort of cohort and how many followers the character
can recruit.

**Leadership Modifiers:** Several factors can affect a character's
Leadership score, causing it to vary from the base score (character
level + Cha modifier). A character's reputation (from the point of view
of the cohort or follower he is trying to attract) raises or lowers his
Leadership score:

| **Leader’s Reputation** | **Modifier** |
| ----------------------- | ------------ |
| Great renown            | +2           |
| Fairness and generosity | +1           |
| Special power           | +1           |
| Failure                 | –1           |
| Aloofness               | –1           |
| Cruelty                 | –2           |

Other modifiers may apply when the character tries to attract a cohort:

| **The Leader . . .**                               | **Modifier** |
| -------------------------------------------------- | ------------ |
| Has a familiar, special mount, or animal companion | –2           |
| Recruits a cohort of a different alignment         | –1           |
| Caused the death of a cohort                       | –2*          |
| * Cumulative per cohort killed.                    |              |

Followers have different priorities from cohorts. When the character tries to attract a new follower, use any of the following modifiers that apply.

| **The Leader . . .**                                          | **Modifier** |
| ------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------ |
| Has a stronghold, base of operations, guildhouse, or the like | +2           |
| Moves around a lot                                            | –1           |
| Caused the death of other followers                           | –1.          |


| Leadership Score | Cohort Level | —— Number of Followers by Level —— |         |         |         |     |     |
| ---------------- | ------------ | ---------------------------------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | --- | --- |
| **1st**          | **2nd**      | **3rd**                            | **4th** | **5th** | **6th** |     |     |
| 1 or lower       | —            | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 2                | 1st          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 3                | 2nd          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 4                | 3rd          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 5                | 3rd          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 6                | 4th          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 7                | 5th          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 8                | 5th          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 9                | 6th          | —                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 10               | 7th          | 5                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 11               | 7th          | 6                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 12               | 8th          | 8                                  | —       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 13               | 9th          | 10                                 | 1       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 14               | 10th         | 15                                 | 1       | —       | —       | —   | —   |
| 15               | 10th         | 20                                 | 2       | 1       | —       | —   | —   |
| 16               | 11th         | 25                                 | 2       | 1       | —       | —   | —   |
| 17               | 12th         | 30                                 | 3       | 1       | 1       | —   | —   |
| 18               | 12th         | 35                                 | 3       | 1       | 1       | —   | —   |
| 19               | 13th         | 40                                 | 4       | 2       | 1       | 1   | —   |
| 20               | 14th         | 50                                 | 5       | 3       | 2       | 1   | —   |
| 21               | 15th         | 60                                 | 6       | 3       | 2       | 1   | 1   |
| 22               | 15th         | 75                                 | 7       | 4       | 2       | 2   | 1   |
| 23               | 16th         | 90                                 | 9       | 5       | 3       | 2   | 1   |
| 24               | 17th         | 110                                | 11      | 6       | 3       | 2   | 1   |
| 25 or higher     | 17th         | 135                                | 13      | 7       | 4       | 2   | 2   |

*Leadership Score:* A character's base Leadership score equals his level
plus any Charisma modifier. In order to take into account negative
Charisma modifiers, this table allows for very low Leadership scores,
but the character must still be 6th level or higher in order to gain the
Leadership feat. Outside factors can affect a character's Leadership
score, as detailed above.

*Cohort Level:* The character can attract a cohort of up to this level.
Regardless of a character's Leadership score, he can only recruit a
cohort who is two or more levels lower than himself. The cohort should
be equipped with gear appropriate for its level. A character can try to
attract a cohort of a particular race, class, and alignment. The
cohort's alignment may not be opposed to the leader's alignment on
either the law-vs-chaos or good-vs-evil axis, and the leader takes a
Leadership penalty if he recruits a cohort of an alignment different
from his own.

Cohorts earn XP as follows:

The cohort does not count as a party member when determining the party's
XP.

Divide the cohort's level by the level of the PC with whom he or she is
associated (the character with the Leadership feat who attracted the
cohort).

Multiply this result by the total XP awarded to the PC and add that
number of experience points to the cohort's total.

If a cohort gains enough XP to bring it to a level one lower than the
associated PC's character level, the cohort does not gain the new
level---its new XP total is 1 less than the amount needed attain the
next level.

*Number of Followers by Level:* The character can lead up to the
indicated number of characters of each level. Followers are similar to
cohorts, except they're generally low-level NPCs. Because they're
generally five or more levels behind the character they follow, they're
rarely effective in combat.

Followers don't earn experience and thus don't gain levels. However,
when a character with Leadership attains a new level, the player
consults the table above to determine if she has acquired more
followers, some of which may be higher level than the existing
followers. (You don't consult the table to see if your cohort gains
levels, however, because cohorts earn experience on their own.)

### Lightning Reflexes 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Reflex saving throws.

### Magical Aptitude 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Spellcraft checks and Use Magic
Device checks.

### Manyshot 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 17, Point Blank Shot, Rapid Shot, base attack
bonus +6

**Benefit:** As a standard action, you may fire two arrows at a single
opponent within 30 feet. Both arrows use the same attack roll (with a
--4 penalty) to determine success and deal damage normally (but see
Special).

For every five points of base attack bonus you have above +6, you may
add one additional arrow to this attack, to a maximum of four arrows at
a base attack bonus of +16. However, each arrow after the second adds a
cumulative --2 penalty on the attack roll (for a total penalty of --6
for three arrows and --8 for four).

Damage reduction and other resistances apply separately against each
arrow fired.

**Special:** Regardless of the number of arrows you fire, you apply
precision-based damage only once. If you score a critical hit, only the
first arrow fired deals critical damage; all others deal regular damage.

A fighter may select Manyshot as one of his fighter bonus feats.

A 6th-level ranger who has chosen the archery combat style is treated as
having Manyshot even if he does not have the prerequisites for it, but
only when he is wearing light or no armor.

### Martial Weapon Proficiency 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose a type of martial weapon. You understand how to use that type of
martial weapon in combat.

**Benefit:** You make attack rolls with the selected weapon normally.

**Normal:** When using a weapon with which you are not proficient, you
take a --4 penalty on attack rolls.

**Special:** Barbarians, fighters, paladins, and rangers are proficient
with all martial weapons. They need not select this feat.

You can gain Martial Weapon Proficiency multiple times. Each time you
take the feat, it applies to a new type of weapon.

A cleric who chooses the War domain automatically gains the Martial
Weapon Proficiency feat related to his deity's favored weapon as a bonus
feat, if the weapon is a martial one. He need not select it.

### Maximize Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** All variable, numeric effects of a spell modified by this
feat are maximized. Saving throws and opposed rolls are not affected,
nor are spells without random variables. A maximized spell uses up a
spell slot three levels higher than the spell's actual level.

An empowered, maximized spell gains the separate benefits of each feat:
the maximum result plus one-half the normally rolled result.

### Mobility 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Dodge.

**Benefit:** You get a +4 dodge bonus to Armor Class against attacks of
opportunity caused when you move out of or within a threatened area. A
condition that makes you lose your Dexterity bonus to Armor Class (if
any) also makes you lose dodge bonuses.

Dodge bonuses stack with each other, unlike most types of bonuses.

**Special:** A fighter may select Mobility as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Mounted Archery 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat.

**Benefit:** The penalty you take when using a ranged weapon while
mounted is halved: --2 instead of --4 if your mount is taking a double
move, and --4 instead of --8 if your mount is running.

**Special:** A fighter may select Mounted Archery as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Mounted Combat 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Ride 1 rank.

**Benefit:** Once per round when your mount is hit in combat, you may
attempt a Ride check (as a reaction) to negate the hit. The hit is
negated if your Ride check result is greater than the opponent's attack
roll. (Essentially, the Ride check result becomes the mount's Armor
Class if it's higher than the mount's regular AC.)

**Special:** A fighter may select Mounted Combat as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Natural Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Wis 13, wild shape ability.

**Benefit:** You can complete the verbal and somatic components of
spells while in a wild shape. You substitute various noises and gestures
for the normal verbal and somatic components of a spell.

You can also use any material components or focuses you possess, even if
such items are melded within your current form. This feat does not
permit the use of magic items while you are in a form that could not
ordinarily use them, and you do not gain the ability to speak while in a
wild shape.

### Negotiator 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Diplomacy checks and Sense Motive
checks.

### Nimble Fingers 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Disable Device checks and Open
Lock checks.

### Persuasive 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Bluff checks and Intimidate
checks.

### Point Blank Shot 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +1 bonus on attack and damage rolls with ranged
weapons at ranges of up to 30 feet.

**Special:** A fighter may select Point Blank Shot as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Power Attack 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Str 13.

**Benefit:** On your action, before making attack rolls for a round, you
may choose to subtract a number from all melee attack rolls and add the
same number to all melee damage rolls. This number may not exceed your
base attack bonus. The penalty on attacks and bonus on damage apply
until your next turn.

**Special:** If you attack with a two-handed weapon, or with a
one-handed weapon wielded in two hands, instead add twice the number
subtracted from your attack rolls. You can't add the bonus from Power
Attack to the damage dealt with a light weapon (except with unarmed
strikes or natural weapon attacks), even though the penalty on attack
rolls still applies. (Normally, you treat a double weapon as a
one-handed weapon and a light weapon. If you choose to use a double
weapon like a two-handed weapon, attacking with only one end of it in a
round, you treat it as a two-handed weapon.)

A fighter may select Power Attack as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Precise Shot 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Point Blank Shot.

**Benefit:** You can shoot or throw ranged weapons at an opponent
engaged in melee without taking the standard --4 penalty on your attack
roll.

**Special:** A fighter may select Precise Shot as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Quick Draw 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Base attack bonus +1.

**Benefit:** You can draw a weapon as a free action instead of as a move
action. You can draw a hidden weapon (see the Sleight of Hand skill) as
a move action.

A character who has selected this feat may throw weapons at his full
normal rate of attacks (much like a character with a bow).

**Normal:** Without this feat, you may draw a weapon as a move action,
or (if your base attack bonus is +1 or higher) as a free action as part
of movement. Without this feat, you can draw a hidden weapon as a
standard action.

**Special:** A fighter may select Quick Draw as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Quicken Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** Casting a quickened spell is a free action. You can perform
another action, even casting another spell, in the same round as you
cast a quickened spell. You may cast only one quickened spell per round.
A spell whose casting time is more than 1 full round action cannot be
quickened. A quickened spell uses up a spell slot four levels higher
than the spell's actual level. Casting a quickened spell doesn't provoke
an attack of opportunity.

**Special:** This feat can't be applied to any spell cast spontaneously
(including sorcerer spells, bard spells, and cleric or druid spells cast
spontaneously), since applying a metamagic feat to a spontaneously cast
spell automatically increases the casting time to a full-round action.

### Rapid Reload 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose a type of crossbow (hand, light, or heavy).

**Prerequisite:** Weapon Proficiency (crossbow type chosen).

**Benefit:** The time required for you to reload your chosen type of
crossbow is reduced to a free action (for a hand or light crossbow) or a
move action (for a heavy crossbow). Reloading a crossbow still provokes
an attack of opportunity.

If you have selected this feat for hand crossbow or light crossbow, you
may fire that weapon as many times in a full attack action as you could
attack if you were using a bow.

**Normal:** A character without this feat needs a move action to reload
a hand or light crossbow, or a full-round action to reload a heavy
crossbow.

**Special:** You can gain Rapid Reload multiple times. Each time you
take the feat, it applies to a new type of crossbow.

A fighter may select Rapid Reload as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Rapid Shot 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Point Blank Shot.

**Benefit:** You can get one extra attack per round with a ranged
weapon. The attack is at your highest base attack bonus, but each attack
you make in that round (the extra one and the normal ones) takes a --2
penalty. You must use the full attack action to use this feat.

**Special:** A fighter may select Rapid Shot as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

A 2nd-level ranger who has chosen the archery combat style is treated as
having Rapid Shot, even if he does not have the prerequisites for it,
but only when he is wearing light or no armor.

### Ride-by Attack 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat.

**Benefit:** When you are mounted and use the charge action, you may
move and attack as if with a standard charge and then move again
(continuing the straight line of the charge). Your total movement for
the round can't exceed double your mounted speed. You and your mount do
not provoke an attack of opportunity from the opponent that you attack.

**Special:** A fighter may select Ride-By Attack as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Run 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** When running, you move five times your normal speed (if
wearing medium, light, or no armor and carrying no more than a medium
load) or four times your speed (if wearing heavy armor or carrying a
heavy load). If you make a jump after a running start (see the Jump
skill description), you gain a +4 bonus on your Jump check. While
running, you retain your Dexterity bonus to AC.

**Normal:** You move four times your speed while running (if wearing
medium, light, or no armor and carrying no more than a medium load) or
three times your speed (if wearing heavy armor or carrying a heavy
load), and you lose your Dexterity bonus to AC.

### Scribe Scroll 
***Feat Type: (featType::Item Creation)***

**Prerequisite:** Caster level 1st.

**Benefit:** You can create a scroll of any spell that you know.
Scribing a scroll takes one day for each 1,000 gp in its base price. The
base price of a scroll is its spell level x its caster level x 25 gp. To
scribe a scroll, you must spend 1/25 of this base price in XP and use up
raw materials costing one-half of this base price.

Any scroll that stores a spell with a costly material component or an XP
cost also carries a commensurate cost. In addition to the costs derived
from the base price, you must expend the material component or pay the
XP when scribing the scroll.

### Self-Sufficient 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Heal checks and Survival checks.

### Shield Proficiency 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You can use a shield and take only the standard penalties.

**Normal:** When you are using a shield with which you are not
proficient, you take the shield's armor check penalty on attack rolls
and on all skill checks that involve moving, including Ride checks.

**Special:** Barbarians, bards, clerics, druids, fighters, paladins, and
rangers automatically have Shield Proficiency as a bonus feat. They need
not select it.

### Shot on the Run 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Dodge, Mobility, Point Blank Shot, base
attack bonus +4.

**Benefit:** When using the attack action with a ranged weapon, you can
move both before and after the attack, provided that your total distance
moved is not greater than your speed.

**Special:** A fighter may select Shot on the Run as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Silent Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** A silent spell can be cast with no verbal components.
Spells without verbal components are not affected. A silent spell uses
up a spell slot one level higher than the spell's actual level.

**Special:** Bard spells cannot be enhanced by this metamagic feat.

### Simple Weapon Proficiency 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You make attack rolls with simple weapons normally.

**Normal:** When using a weapon with which you are not proficient, you
take a --4 penalty on attack rolls.

**Special:** All characters except for druids, monks, and wizards are
automatically proficient with all simple weapons. They need not select
this feat.

### Skill Focus 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose a skill.

**Benefit:** You get a +3 bonus on all checks involving that skill.

**Special:** You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects do not
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new skill.

### Snatch Arrows 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 15, Deflect Arrows, Improved Unarmed Strike.

**Benefit:** When using the Deflect Arrows feat you may catch the weapon
instead of just deflecting it. Thrown weapons can immediately be thrown
back at the original attacker (even though it isn't your turn) or kept
for later use.

You must have at least one hand free (holding nothing) to use this feat.

**Special:** A fighter may select Snatch Arrows as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Spell Focus 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose a school of magic.

**Benefit:** Add +1 to the Difficulty Class for all saving throws
against spells from the school of magic you select.

**Special:** You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects do not
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new school of magic.

### Spell Mastery 
***Feat Type: (featType::Special)***

**Prerequisite:** Wizard level 1st.

**Benefit:** Each time you take this feat, choose a number of spells
equal to your Intelligence modifier that you already know. From that
point on, you can prepare these spells without referring to a spellbook.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you must use a spellbook to prepare all
your spells, except *read magic.*

### Spell Penetration 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on caster level checks (1d20 + caster
level) made to overcome a creature's spell resistance.

### Spirited Charge 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat, Ride-By Attack.

**Benefit:** When mounted and using the charge action, you deal double
damage with a melee weapon (or triple damage with a lance).

**Special:** A fighter may select Spirited Charge as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Spring Attack 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Dodge, Mobility, base attack bonus +4.

**Benefit:** When using the attack action with a melee weapon, you can
move both before and after the attack, provided that your total distance
moved is not greater than your speed. Moving in this way does not
provoke an attack of opportunity from the defender you attack, though it
might provoke attacks of opportunity from other creatures, if
appropriate. You can't use this feat if you are wearing heavy armor.

You must move at least 5 feet both before and after you make your attack
in order to utilize the benefits of Spring Attack.

**Special:** A fighter may select Spring Attack as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Stealthy 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You get a +2 bonus on all Hide checks and Move Silently
checks.

### Still Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** A stilled spell can be cast with no somatic components.

Spells without somatic components are not affected. A stilled spell uses
up a spell slot one level higher than the spell's actual level.

### Stunning Fist 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Wis 13, Improved Unarmed Strike, base attack
bonus +8.

**Benefit:** You must declare that you are using this feat before you
make your attack roll (thus, a failed attack roll ruins the attempt).
Stunning Fist forces a foe damaged by your unarmed attack to make a
Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 your character level + your Wis
modifier), in addition to dealing damage normally. A defender who fails
this saving throw is stunned for 1 round (until just before your next
action). A stunned character can't act, loses any Dexterity bonus to AC,
and takes a --2 penalty to AC. You may attempt a stunning attack once
per day for every four levels you have attained (but see Special), and
no more than once per round. Constructs, oozes, plants, undead,
incorporeal creatures, and creatures immune to critical hits cannot be
stunned.

**Special:** A monk may select Stunning Fist as a bonus feat at 1st
level, even if she does not meet the prerequisites. A monk who selects
this feat may attempt a stunning attack a number of times per day equal
to her monk level, plus one more time per day for every four levels she
has in classes other than monk.

A fighter may select Stunning Fist as one of his fighter bonus feats.

### Toughness 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** You gain +3 hit points.

**Special:** A character may gain this feat multiple times. Its effects
stack.

### Tower Shield Proficiency 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Shield Proficiency.

**Benefit:** You can use a tower shield and suffer only the standard
penalties.

**Normal:** A character who is using a shield with which he or she is
not proficient takes the shield's armor check penalty on attack rolls
and on all skill checks that involve moving, including Ride.

**Special:** Fighters automatically have Tower Shield Proficiency as a
bonus feat. They need not select it.

### Track 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Benefit:** To find tracks or to follow them for 1 mile requires a
successful Survival check. You must make another Survival check every
time the tracks become difficult to follow.

You move at half your normal speed (or at your normal speed with a --5
penalty on the check, or at up to twice your normal speed with a --20
penalty on the check). The DC depends on the surface and the prevailing
conditions, as given on the table below:

| Surface          | Survival DC | Surface Survival | DC  |
| ---------------- | ----------- | ---------------- | --- |
| Very soft ground | 5           | Firm ground      | 15  |
| Soft ground      | 10          | Hard ground      | 20  |
|                  |             |                  |     |

_Very Soft Ground:_ Any surface (fresh snow, thick dust, wet mud) that holds deep, clear impressions of footprints.

_Soft Ground:_ Any surface soft enough to yield to pressure, but firmer than wet mud or fresh snow, in which a creature leaves frequent but shallow footprints.

_Firm Ground:_ Most normal outdoor surfaces (such as lawns, fields, woods, and the like) or exceptionally soft or dirty indoor surfaces (thick rugs and very dirty or dusty floors). The creature might leave some traces (broken branches or tufts of hair), but it leaves only occasional or partial footprints.

_Hard Ground:_ Any surface that doesn’t hold footprints at all, such as bare rock or an indoor floor. Most streambeds fall into this category, since any footprints left behind are obscured or washed away. The creature leaves only traces (scuff marks or displaced pebbles).

Several modifiers may apply to the Survival check, as given on the table below.

| Condition                                                                            | Survival DC Modifier |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------- |
| Every three creatures in the group being tracked                                     | –1                   |
| Size of creature or creatures being tracked:**1**                                    |                      |
| Fine                                                                                 | +8                   |
| Diminutive                                                                           | +4                   |
| Tiny                                                                                 | +2                   |
| Small                                                                                | +1                   |
| Medium                                                                               | +0                   |
| Large                                                                                | –1                   |
| Huge                                                                                 | –2                   |
| Gargantuan                                                                           | –4                   |
| Colossal                                                                             | –8                   |
| Every 24 hours since the trail was made                                              | +1                   |
| Every hour of rain since the trail was made                                          | +1                   |
| Fresh snow cover since the trail was made                                            | +10                  |
| Poor visibility:**2**                                                                |                      |
| Overcast or moonless night                                                           | +6                   |
| Moonlight                                                                            | +3                   |
| Fog or precipitation                                                                 | +3                   |
| Tracked party hides trail (and moves at half speed)                                  | +5                   |
| 1 For a group of mixed sizes, apply only the modifier for the largest size category. |                      |
| 2 Apply only the largest modifier from this category.                                |                      |

If you fail a Survival check, you can retry after 1 hour (outdoors) or
10 minutes (indoors) of searching.

**Normal:** Without this feat, you can use the Survival skill to find
tracks, but you can follow them only if the DC for the task is 10 or
lower. Alternatively, you can use the Search skill to find a footprint
or similar sign of a creature's passage using the DCs given above, but
you can't use Search to follow tracks, even if someone else has already
found them.

**Special:** A ranger automatically has Track as a bonus feat. He need
not select it.

This feat does not allow you to find or follow the tracks made by a
subject of a *pass without trace* spell.

### Trample 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Ride 1 rank, Mounted Combat.

**Benefit:** When you attempt to overrun an opponent while mounted, your
target may not choose to avoid you. Your mount may make one hoof attack
against any target you knock down, gaining the standard +4 bonus on
attack rolls against prone targets.

**Special:** A fighter may select Trample as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Two-Weapon Defense 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 15, Two-Weapon Fighting.

**Benefit:** When wielding a double weapon or two weapons (not including
natural weapons or unarmed strikes), you gain a +1 shield bonus to your
AC.

When you are fighting defensively or using the total defense action,
this shield bonus increases to +2.

**Special:** A fighter may select Two-Weapon Defense as one of his
fighter bonus feats.

### Two-Weapon Fighting 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

You can fight with a weapon in each hand. You can make one extra attack
each round with the second weapon.

**Prerequisite:** Dex 15.

**Benefit:** Your penalties on attack rolls for fighting with two
weapons are reduced. The penalty for your primary hand lessens by 2 and
the one for your off hand lessens by 6.

**Normal:**If you wield a second weapon in your off hand, you can get
one extra attack per round with that weapon. When fighting in this way
you suffer a --6 penalty with your regular attack or attacks with your
primary hand and a --10 penalty to the attack with your off hand. If
your off-hand weapon is light the penalties are reduced by 2 each. (An
unarmed strike is always considered light.)

**Special:** A 2nd-level ranger who has chosen the two-weapon combat
style is treated as having Two-Weapon Fighting, even if he does not have
the prerequisite for it, but only when he is wearing light or no armor.

A fighter may select Two-Weapon Fighting as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Weapon Finesse 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisite:** Base attack bonus +1.

**Benefit:** With a light weapon, rapier, whip, or spiked chain made for
a creature of your size category, you may use your Dexterity modifier
instead of your Strength modifier on attack rolls. If you carry a
shield, its armor check penalty applies to your attack rolls.

**Special:** A fighter may select Weapon Finesse as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

Natural weapons are always considered light weapons.

### Weapon Focus 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose one type of weapon. You can also choose unarmed strike or grapple
(or ray, if you are a spellcaster) as your weapon for purposes of this
feat.

**Prerequisites:** Proficiency with selected weapon, base attack bonus
+1.

**Benefit:** You gain a +1 bonus on all attack rolls you make using the
selected weapon.

**Special:** You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects do not
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new type of weapon.

A fighter may select Weapon Focus as one of his fighter bonus feats. He
must have Weapon Focus with a weapon to gain the Weapon Specialization
feat for that weapon.

### Weapon Specialization 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

Choose one type of weapon for which you have already selected the Weapon
Focus feat. You can also choose unarmed strike or grapple as your weapon
for purposes of this feat. You deal extra damage when using this weapon.

**Prerequisites:** Proficiency with selected weapon, Weapon Focus with
selected weapon, fighter level 4th.

**Benefit:** You gain a +2 bonus on all damage rolls you make using the
selected weapon.

**Special:** You can gain this feat multiple times. Its effects do not
stack. Each time you take the feat, it applies to a new type of weapon.

A fighter may select Weapon Specialization as one of his fighter bonus
feats.

### Whirlwind Attack 
***Feat Type: (featType::General)***

**Prerequisites:** Dex 13, Int 13, Combat Expertise, Dodge, Mobility,
Spring Attack, base attack bonus +4.

**Benefit:** When you use the full attack action, you can give up your
regular attacks and instead make one melee attack at your full base
attack bonus against each opponent within reach.

When you use the Whirlwind Attack feat, you also forfeit any bonus or
extra attacks granted by other feats, spells, or abilities.

**Special:** A fighter may select Whirlwind Attack as one of his fighter
bonus feats.

### Widen Spell 
***Feat Type: (featType::Metamagic)***

**Benefit:** You can alter a burst, emanation, line, or spread shaped
spell to increase its area. Any numeric measurements of the spell's area
increase by 100%.A widened spell uses up a spell slot three levels
higher than the spell's actual level.

Spells that do not have an area of one of these four sorts are not
affected by this feat.
