---
lang: en
title: 3.5 Compendium / Monsters / 3.5 Monsters - L
aliases: 3.5 Monsters - L
tags: 3-5e/rules/monsters
---

# MONSTERS L

**[[3.5 Monsters - K|Previous: Monsters K.]]

## Lamia



|  | Large Magical Beast | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 9d10+9 (58 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +2 | 
| Speed: | 60 ft. (12 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 18 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 16 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +9/+17 | 
| Attack: | Touch +12 melee (1d4 Wisdom drain) or dagger +12 melee (1d6+4/19--20) or claw +12 melee (1d4+4) | 
| Full Attack: | Touch +12 melee (1d4 Wisdom drain); or dagger +12/+7 melee (1d6+4/19--20) and 2 claws +7 melee (1d4+2) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Spell-like abilities, Wisdom drain | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision | 
| Saves: | Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +7 | 
| Abilities: | Str 18, Dex 15, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 15, Cha 12 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Bluff\|Bluff]] +14, [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Disguise\|Disguise]] +1 (+3 Acting), [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +11; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Dodge\|Dodge]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Mobility\|Mobility]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Spring Attack\|Spring Attack]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate deserts | 
| Organization: | Solitary, pair, or gang (3--4) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 6 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually chaotic evil | 
| Advancement: | 10--13 HD (Large); 14--27 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | +4 | 
A typical lamia is about 8 feet long and weighs about 700 pounds. 

#### Combat

Though a lamia is powerful and dangerous in close combat, it has no stomach for a fair fight. It uses its illusion abilities to lure heroes into perilous situations, and then uses its Spring Attack feat to bound out of the shadows and drain Wisdom from its opponents. When it has sapped the will of its victim, it uses its enchantment abilities to beguile and ensnare the unfortunate soul. A lamia forced into physical combat attacks with a dagger in one of its human hands and a pair of lion-like claws. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Disguise Self\|Disguise Self]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Ventriloquism\|Ventriloquism]] ;
 - **1/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Deep Slumber\|Deep Slumber]] (DC 14);
 - **3/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Charm Monster\|Charm Monster]] (DC 15), [[3.5 Spell List#Major Image\|Major Image]] (DC 14), [[3.5 Spell List#Mirror Image\|Mirror Image]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Suggestion\|Suggestion]] (DC 14);
 -  Caster level 9th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

### Wisdom Drain (Su)
A lamia drains 1d4 points of Wisdom each time it hits with its melee touch attack. (Unlike with other kinds of ability drain attacks, a lamia does not heal any damage when it uses its Wisdom drain.) Lamias try to use this power early in an encounter to make foes more susceptible to *charm monster* and *suggestion.* 

#### Skills
Lamias have a +4 racial bonus on Bluff and Hide checks. 

## Lammasu



|  | Lammasu | Golden Protector (Celestial Half-Dragon Lammasu) | 
|---|---|---|
|  | Large Magical Beast | Large Dragon | 
| Hit Dice: | 7d10+21 (59 hp) | 10d12+60 (125 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | +3 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 60 ft.(average) | 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 60 ft.(average) | 
| Armor Class: | 20 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19 | 29 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +14 natural, +2 *bracers of armor +2,* +1 *ring of protection +1*), touch 13, flat-footed 26 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +7/+17 | +10/+23 | 
| Attack: | Claw +12 melee (1d6+6) | Claw +19 melee (1d6+9) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +12 melee (1d6+6) | Claw +19 melee (1d6+9) and bite +13 melee (1d8+4) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Pounce, rake 1d6+3, spells | Breath weapon, pounce, smite evil, rake 1d6+4, spells | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, magic circle against evil, spell-like abilities | Damage reduction 5/magic, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, *sleep,* and paralysis, low-light vision, magic circle against evil, resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10, spell-like abilities, spell resistance 15 | 
| Saves: | Fort +8, Ref +8, Will +7 | Fort +13, Ref +12, Will +10 | 
| Abilities: | Str 23, Dex 12, Con 17, Int 16, Wis 17, Cha 14 | Str 28, Dex 17, Con 22, Int 18, Wis 20, Cha 18 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (arcana) +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +15; | [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +19, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +19, [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (arcana) +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (the Planes) +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +18, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +18, [[3.5 Skill List#Spellcraft\|Spellcraft]] +19, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +20, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +18 (+20 Other Planes And Tracking); | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Blind\|Blind]] -Fight, [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Lightning Reflexes\|Lightning Reflexes]] ; | [[3.5 Feat List#Blind\|Blind]] -Fight, [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Lightning Reflexes\|Lightning Reflexes]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (claw); | 
| Environment: | Temperate deserts | A lawful good plane | 
| Organization: | Solitary | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 8 | 13 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Always lawful good | Always lawful good | 
| Advancement: | 8--10 HD (Large); 11--21 HD (Huge) | 11--30 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | +5 | +10 | 
A typical lammasu is about 8 feet long and weighs about 500 pounds. Lammasus speak Common, Draconic, and Celestial. 

#### Combat

A lammasu attacks with spells or its razor-sharp claws. It almost always enters combat if it observes a good creature being threatened by evil. 

#### Spells
A lammasu casts spells as a 7th-level cleric, and can choose spells from the cleric spell list, plus any two of the following domains: Good, Healing, Knowledge, or Law. 

 - **Typical Cleric Spells Prepared** (6/6/5/4/2; save DC 13 + spell level)
 - **0:** [[3.5 Spell List#Detect Magic\|Detect Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Guidance\|Guidance]] (2), [[3.5 Spell List#Light\|Light]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Read Magic\|Read Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Resistance\|Resistance]] ;
 - **1st:** [[3.5 Spell List#Bless\|Bless]] (2), [[3.5 Spell List#Detect Evil\|Detect Evil]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Divine Favor\|Divine Favor]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Entropic Shield\|Entropic Shield]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Protection From Evil\|Protection From Evil]] <sup>1</sup>;
 - **2nd:** [[3.5 Spell List#Aid\|Aid]] <sup>1</sup>, [[3.5 Spell List#Bear’s Endurance\|Bear’s Endurance]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Bull’s Strength\|Bull’s Strength]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Lesser Restoration\|Lesser Restoration]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Resist Energy\|Resist Energy]] ;
 - **3rd:** [[3.5 Spell List#Daylight\|Daylight]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Dispel Magic\|Dispel Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Magic Circle Against Evil\|Magic Circle Against Evil]] <sup>1</sup>, [[3.5 Spell List#Remove Curse\|Remove Curse]] ;
 - **4th:** [[3.5 Spell List#Holy Smite\|Holy Smite]] <sup>1</sup>, [[3.5 Spell List#Neutralize Poison\|Neutralize Poison]] ;
 - * 
<sup>1</sup>Domain spell. Domains: Good and Healing.

#### Magic Circle against Evil (Su)
A lammasu radiates a continuous magic circle against evil that affects a 20-foot radius. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **1/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Dimension Door\|Dimension Door]] ;
 - **2/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Invisibility, Greater\|Invisibility, Greater]] (self Only);
 -  Caster level 7th.

#### Pounce (Ex)
If a lammasu charges a foe, it can make a full attack, including two rake attacks. 

#### Rake (Ex)
Attack bonus +12 melee, damage 1d6+3. 

#### Skills
Lammasus have a +2 racial bonus on Spot checks. 

### Golden Protector (Celestial Half-Dragon Lammasu)

Child of a celestial lammasu and a gold dragon, the golden protector has migrated to the Material Plane to more actively combat evil. 

#### Combat

The golden protector's natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Breath Weapon (Su)
30-foot cone, 1/day, damage 6d8 fire, Reflex DC 21 half. 

#### Smite Evil (Su)
Once per day a golden protector can make a normal melee attack to deal an extra 10 points of damage against an evil opponent. 

 - **Typical Cleric Spells Prepared** (6/7/5/4/3; save DC 15 + spell level)
 - **0:** [[3.5 Spell List#Detect Magic\|Detect Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Guidance\|Guidance]] (2), [[3.5 Spell List#Light\|Light]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Read Magic\|Read Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Resistance\|Resistance]] ;
 - **1st:** [[3.5 Spell List#Bless\|Bless]] (2), [[3.5 Spell List#Detect Evil\|Detect Evil]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Divine Favor\|Divine Favor]] (2), [[3.5 Spell List#Entropic Shield\|Entropic Shield]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Protection From Evil\|Protection From Evil]] <sup>1</sup>;
 - **2nd:** [[3.5 Spell List#Aid\|Aid]] <sup>1</sup>, [[3.5 Spell List#Bear’s Endurance\|Bear’s Endurance]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Bull’s Strength\|Bull’s Strength]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Lesser Restoration\|Lesser Restoration]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Resist Energy\|Resist Energy]] ;
 - **3rd:** [[3.5 Spell List#Daylight\|Daylight]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Dispel Magic\|Dispel Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Magic Circle Against Evil\|Magic Circle Against Evil]] <sup>1</sup>, [[3.5 Spell List#Remove Curse\|Remove Curse]] ;
 - **4th:** [[3.5 Spell List#Dismissal\|Dismissal]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Holy Smite\|Holy Smite]] <sup>1</sup>, [[3.5 Spell List#Neutralize Poison\|Neutralize Poison]] ;
 - * 
<sup>1</sup>Domain spell. Domains: Good and Healing.

#### Rake (Ex)
Attack bonus +19 melee, damage 1d6+4. 

*Possessions: Bracers of armor +2, ring of protection* +1. (Different golden protectors may have different possessions.) 

## Leonal



|  | Medium Outsider (Extraplanar, Good) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 12d8+60 (114 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +3 | 
| Speed: | 60 ft. (12 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 27 (+3 Dex, +14 natural) | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +12/+20 | 
| Attack: | Claw +20 melee (1d6+8) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +20 melee (1d6+8) and bite +15 melee (1d8+4) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Roar, pounce, improved grab, rake 1d6+8, spell-like abilities | 
| Special Qualities: | Damage reduction 10/evil and silver, darkvision 60 ft., immunity to electricity and petrification, lay on hands, lowlight vision, protective aura, resistance to cold 10 and sonic 10, speak with animals, spell resistance 28 | 
| Saves: | Fort +13 (+17 against poison), Ref +11, Will +10 | 
| Abilities: | Str 27, Dex 17, Con 20, Int 14, Wis 14, Cha 15 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Balance\|Balance]] +22, [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +22, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +35, [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (any) +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +22, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +17; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Monster Feats#Ability Focus\|Ability Focus]] (roar), [[3.5 Feat List#Dodge\|Dodge]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Mobility\|Mobility]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Spring Attack\|Spring Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Track\|Track]] ; | 
| Environment: | A good-aligned plane. | 
| Organization: | Solitary or pride (4--9) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 12 | 
| Treasure: | No coins; double goods; standard items | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral good | 
| Advancement: | 13--18 HD (Medium); 19--36 HD (Large) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
#### Combat

Leonals like their battles as straightforward as can be. They begin with a roar to put their foes off balance, then follow up with a frenzy of claw and bite attacks. They closely coordinate with others in their pride, watching one another's flanks and setting up devastating attacks. 

A leonal's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Roar (Su)
A leonal can roar up to three times per day. Each roar releases a blast in a 60-foot cone that duplicates the effects of a *holy word* spell and deals an extra 2d6 points of sonic damage (Fortitude DC 20 negates). The save DC is Charisma-based. 

#### Pounce (Ex)
If a leonal charges a foe, it can make a full attack, including two rake attacks. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, a leonal must hit with its bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can rake. 

#### Rake (Ex)
Attack bonus +20 melee, damage 1d6+8. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Detect Thoughts\|Detect Thoughts]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Fireball\|Fireball]] (DC 15), [[3.5 Spell List#Hold Monster\|Hold Monster]] (DC 17), [[3.5 Spell List#Polymorph\|Polymorph]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Wall Of Force\|Wall Of Force]] ;
 - **1/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Heal\|Heal]] (DC 18);
 - **3/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Cure Critical Wounds\|Cure Critical Wounds]] (DC 16), [[3.5 Spell List#Neutralize Poison\|Neutralize Poison]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Remove Disease\|Remove Disease]] ;
 -  Caster level 10th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

#### Lay on Hands (Su)
As the paladin class feature, except that each day, a leonal can heal an amount of damage equal to its full normal hit points. 

#### Protective Aura (Su)
Against attacks made or effects created by evil creatures, this ability provides a +4 deflection bonus to AC and a +4 resistance bonus on saving throws to anyone within 20 feet of the leonal. Otherwise, it functions as a *magic circle against evil* effect and a *lesser globe of invulnerability,* both with a radius of 20 feet (caster level equals leonal's HD). (The defensive benefits from the circle are not included in a leonal's statistics block.) 

#### Speak with Animals (Su)
This ability works like *speak with animals* (caster level 8th) but is a free action and does not require sound. 

#### Skills
Leonals have a +4 racial bonus on Balance, Hide, and Move Silently checks. 

## Lich

A lich is an undead spellcaster, usually a wizard or sorcerer but sometimes a cleric or other spellcaster, who has used its magical powers to unnaturally extend its life. 

A lich is a gaunt and skeletal humanoid with withered flesh stretched tight across horribly visible bones. Its eyes have long ago been lost to decay, but bright pinpoints of crimson light burn on in the empty sockets. 

Liches speak Common plus any other languages they knew in life. 

### Creating a Lich

"Lich" is an acquired template that can be added to any humanoid creature (referred to hereafter as the base creature), provided it can create the required phylactery; see The Lich's Phylactery, below. 

A lich has all the base creature's statistics and special abilities except as noted here. 

#### Size and Type
The creature's type changes to undead. Do not recalculate base attack bonus, saves, or skill points. Size is unchanged. 

#### Hit Dice
Increase all current and future Hit Dice to d12s. 

#### Armor Class
A lich has a +5 natural armor bonus or the base creature's natural armor bonus, whichever is better. 

#### Attack
A lich has a touch attack that it can use once per round. If the base creature can use weapons, the lich retains this ability. A creature with natural weapons retains those natural weapons. A lich fighting without weapons uses either its touch attack or its primary natural weapon (if it has any). A lich armed with a weapon uses its touch or a weapon, as it desires. 

#### Full Attack
A lich fighting without weapons uses either its touch attack (see above) or its natural weapons (if it has any). If armed with a weapon, it usually uses the weapon as its primary attack along with a touch as a natural secondary attack, provided it has a way to make that attack (either a free hand or a natural weapon that it can use as a secondary attack). 

#### Damage
A lich without natural weapons has a touch attack that uses negative energy to deal 1d8+5 points of damage to living creatures; a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 lich's HD + lich's Cha modifier) halves the damage. A lich with natural weapons can use its touch attack or its natural weaponry, as it prefers. If it chooses the latter, it deals 1d8+5 points of extra damage on one natural weapon attack. 

#### Special Attacks
A lich retains all the base creature's special attacks and gains those described below. Save DCs are equal to 10 + 1/2 lich's HD + lich's Cha modifier unless otherwise noted. 

*Fear Aura (Su):* Liches are shrouded in a dreadful aura of death and evil. Creatures of less than 5 HD in a 60-foot radius that look at the lich must succeed on a Will save or be affected as though by a *fear* spell from a sorcerer of the lich's level. A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same lich's aura for 24 hours. 

*Paralyzing Touch (Su):* Any living creature a lich hits with its touch attack must succeed on a Fortitude save or be permanently paralyzed. *Remove paralysis* or any spell that can remove a curse can free the victim (see the *bestow curse* spell description). 

The effect cannot be dispelled. Anyone paralyzed by a lich seems dead, though a DC 20 Spot check or a DC 15 Heal check reveals that the victim is still alive.. 

*Spells:* A lich can cast any spells it could cast while alive. 

#### Special Qualities
A lich retains all the base creature's special qualities and gains those described below. 

#### Turn Resistance (Ex)
A lich has +4 turn resistance. 

#### Damage Reduction (Su)
A lich's undead body is tough, giving the creature damage reduction 15/bludgeoning and magic. Its natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Immunities (Ex)
Liches have immunity to cold, electricity, polymorph (though they can use polymorph effects on themselves), and mind-affecting attacks. 

#### Abilities
Increase from the base creature as follows: Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +2. Being undead, a lich has no Constitution score. 

#### Skills
Liches have a +8 racial bonus on Hide, Listen, Move Silently, Search, Sense Motive, and Spot checks. Otherwise same as the base creature. 

#### Organization
Solitary or troupe (1 lich, plus 2--4 vampires and 5--8 vampire spawn). 

#### Challenge Rating
Same as the base creature + 2. 

#### Treasure
Standard coins; double goods; double items. 

#### Alignment
Any evil. 

#### Advancement
By character class. 

#### Level Adjustment
Same as the base creature +4. 

#### Lich Characters

The process of becoming a lich is unspeakably evil and can be undertaken only by a willing character. A lich retains all class abilities it had in life. 

#### The Lich's Phylactery

An integral part of becoming a lich is creating a magic phylactery in which the character stores its life force. As a rule, the only way to get rid of a lich for sure is to destroy its phylactery. Unless its phylactery is located and destroyed, a lich reappears 1d10 days after its apparent death. 

Each lich must make its own phylactery, which requires the Craft Wondrous Item feat. The character must be able to cast spells and have a caster level of 11th or higher. The phylactery costs 120,000 gp and 4,800 XP to create and has a caster level equal to that of its creator at the time of creation. 

The most common form of phylactery is a sealed metal box containing strips of parchment on which magical phrases have been transcribed. The box is Tiny and has 40 hit points, hardness 20, and a break DC of 40. 

Other forms of phylacteries can exist, such as rings, amulets, or similar items. 

## Lillend



|  | Large Outsider (Chaotic, Extraplanar, Good) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 7d8+14 (45 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +3 | 
| Speed: | 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 70 ft. (average) | 
| Armor Class: | 17 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +7/+16 | 
| Attack: | Short sword +11 melee (1d8+5/19--20) | 
| Full Attack: | Short sword +11/+6 melee (1d8+5/19--20) and tail slap +6 melee (2d6+2) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Constrict 2d6+5, improved grab, spells, spell-like abilities | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to poison, resistance to fire 10 | 
| Saves: | Fort +7, Ref +10, Will +8 | 
| Abilities: | Str 20, Dex 17, Con 15, Int 14, Wis 16, Cha 18 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Appraise\|Appraise]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +16, [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (arcana) +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Perform\|Perform]] (any One) +14, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Spellcraft\|Spellcraft]] +14, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +17; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Casting\|Combat Casting]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Extend Spell\|Extend Spell]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Lightning Reflexes\|Lightning Reflexes]] ; | 
| Environment: | A chaos-aligned plane | 
| Organization: | Solitary or covey (2--4) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 7 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Always chaotic good | 
| Advancement: | 8--10 HD (Large); 11--21 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | +6 | 
A typical lillend's coils are 20 feet long. The creature weighs about 3,800 pounds. A few lillends have male torsos. 

Lillends speak Celestial, Infernal, Abyssal, and Common. 

#### Combat

Lillends are generally peaceful unless they intend vengeance against someone they believe guilty of harming, or even threatening, a favored art form, artwork, or artist. Then they become implacable foes. They use their spells and spell-like abilities to confuse and weaken opponents before entering combat. A covey of lillends usually discusses strategy before a battle. 

A lillend's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as chaotic-aligned and good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Constrict (Ex)
A lillend deals 2d6+5 points of damage with a successful grapple check. Constricting uses the entire lower portion of its body, so it cannot take any move actions when constricting, though it can still attack with its sword. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, a lillend must hit with its tail slap attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict. 

#### Spells
A lillend casts arcane spells as a 6th-level bard. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **Typical Bard Spells Known** (3/4/3; save DC 14 + spell level)
 - **0:** [[3.5 Spell List#Dancing Lights\|Dancing Lights]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Daze\|Daze]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Detect Magic\|Detect Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Lullaby\|Lullaby]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Mage Hand\|Mage Hand]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Read Magic\|Read Magic]] ;
 - **1st:** [[3.5 Spell List#Charm Person\|Charm Person]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Cure Light Wounds\|Cure Light Wounds]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Identify\|Identify]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Sleep\|Sleep]] ;
 - **2nd:** [[3.5 Spell List#Hold Person\|Hold Person]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Invisibility\|Invisibility]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Sound Burst\|Sound Burst]] ;
 -  Caster level 10th. The save DCs are Charisma-based. 
A lillend also has the bardic music ability as a 6th-level bard.

#### Skills
Lillends have a +4 racial bonus on Survival checks.
## Lizardfolk



|  | Medium Humanoid (Reptilian) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 2d8+2 (11 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +0 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 15 (+5 natural) or 17 (+5 natural, +2 heavy shield), touch 10, flat-footed 15 or 17 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +1/+2 | 
| Attack: | Claw +2 melee (1d4+1) or club +2 melee (1d6+1) or javelin +1 ranged (1d6+1) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +2 melee (1d4+1) and bite +0 melee (1d4); or club +2 melee (1d6+1) and bite +0 melee (1d4); or javelin +1 ranged (1d6+1) | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | Hold breath | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Saves: | Fort +1, Ref +3, Will +0 | 
| Abilities: | Str 13, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 9, Wis 10, Cha 10 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Balance\|Balance]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +2; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Monster Feats#Multiattack\|Multiattack]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate marshes | 
| Organization: | Gang (2--3), band (6--10 plus 50% noncombatants plus 1 leader of 3rd--6th level), or tribe (30--60 plus 2 lieutenants of 3rd--6th level and 1 leader of 4th--10th level) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 1 | 
| Treasure: | 50% coins; 50% goods; 50% items | 
| Alignment: | Usually neutral | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | +1 | 
A lizardfolk is usually 6 to 7 feet tall with green, gray, or brown scales. Its tail is used for balance and is 3 to 4 feet long. A lizardfolk can weigh from 200 to 250 pounds. 

Lizardfolk speak Draconic. 

#### Combat

Lizardfolk fight as unorganized individuals. They prefer frontal assaults and massed rushes, sometimes trying to force foes into the water, where the lizardfolk have an advantage. If outnumbered or if their territory is being invaded, they set snares, plan ambushes, and make raids to hinder enemy supplies. Advanced tribes use more sophisticated tactics and have better traps and ambushes. 

#### Hold Breath
A lizardfolk can hold its breath for a number of rounds equal to four times its Constitution score before it risks drowning. 

#### Skills
Because of their tails, lizardfolk have a +4 racial bonus on Jump, Swim, and Balance checks. The skill modifiers given in the statistics block include a --2 armor check penalty (--4 on Swim checks) for carrying a heavy shield. 

#### Lizardfolk as Characters

Lizardfolk characters possess the following racial traits. 

-  +2 Strength, +2 Constitution, --2 Intelligence.

- Medium size.

- A lizardfolk's base land speed is 30 feet.

- Racial Hit Dice: A lizardfolk begins with two levels of humanoid,
which provide 2d8 Hit Dice, a base attack bonus of +1, and base saving throw bonuses of Fort +0, Ref +3, and Will +0. 

- Racial Skills: A lizardfolk's humanoid levels give it skill points
equal to 5 x (2 + Int modifier, minimum 1). Its class skills are Balance, Jump, and Swim. Lizardfolk have a +4 racial bonus on Balance, Jump, and Swim checks. 

- Racial Feats: A lizardfolk's humanoid levels give it one feat.

- Weapon and Armor Proficiency: A lizardfolk is automatically
proficient with simple weapons and shields. 

-  +5 natural armor bonus.

- Natural Weapons: 2 claws (1d4) and bite (1d4).

- Special Qualities (see above): Hold breath.

- Automatic Languages: Common, Draconic. Bonus Languages: Aquan,
Goblin, Gnoll, Orc. 

- Favored Class: Druid.

- Level adjustment +1.

## Locathah



|  | Medium Humanoid (Aquatic) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 2d8 (9 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 10 ft. (2 squares), swim 60 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 14 (+1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +1/+1 | 
| Attack: | Longspear +2 melee (1d8/3) or light crossbow +2 ranged (1d8/19--20) | 
| Full Attack: | Longspear +2 melee (1d8/3) or light crossbow +2 ranged (1d8/19--20) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Saves: | Fort +3, Ref +1, Will +1 | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | --- | 
| Abilities: | Str 10, Dex 12, Con 10, Int_13, Wis 13, Cha 11 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Craft\|Craft]] (any One) +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +8; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (longspear); | 
| Environment: | Warm aquatic | 
| Organization: | Company (2--4), patrol (11--20 plus 2 3rd-level sergeants and 1 leader of 3rd--6th level), or tribe (30--100 plus 100% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 10 adults, 5 5th-level lieutenants, and 3 7th-level captains) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 1/2 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually neutral | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | +1 | 
Although humanoid in shape, locathahs are clearly more fish than human. The average locathah stands 5 feet tall and weighs 175 pounds. Females and males look very much alike, although the former can be recognized by the two ochre stripes marking their egg sacs. 

Locathahs speak Aquan. 

#### Combat

Any battle with locathahs usually begins with the creatures loosing volleys of bolts from their crossbows; underwater, their crossbows have a range increment of 20 feet. If they have managed to set up an ambush or other trap, they continue to employ crossbows for as long as possible. Otherwise, they close to bring their longspears into play. Although primarily used for fishing, these spears make formidable weapons. 

Locathahs lack teeth, claws, and other natural weapons, so they are not especially dangerous if unarmed. A weaponless locathah will generally turn and flee. 

#### Skills
A locathah has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. 

It can use the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line. 

## Lycanthrope

Lycanthropes are humanoids or giants who can transform themselves into animals. In its natural form, a lycanthrope looks like any other members of its kind, though natural lycanthropes and those who have been afflicted for a long time tend to have or acquire features reminiscent of their animal forms. In animal form, a lycanthrope resembles a powerful version of the normal animal, but on close inspection, its eyes (which often glow red in the dark) show a faint spark of unnatural intelligence. 

Lycanthropy can be spread like a disease. Sometimes a lycanthrope begins life as a normal humanoid or giant who subsequently contracts lycanthropy after being wounded by a lycanthrope. Such a creature is called an afflicted lycanthrope. Other lycanthropes are born as lycanthropes, and are known as natural lycanthropes. 

#### Combat

A lycanthrope in its humanoid (or giant) form uses whatever tactics and weapons are favored by others of its kind, though it tends to be slightly more aggressive. A lycanthrope possesses the senses of its animal form, including scent and low-light vision, and it has a deep empathy for (and ability to communicate with) animals of its animal form. An afflicted lycanthrope damaged in combat may be overwhelmed by rage, causing it to change to its animal form involuntarily. 

A lycanthrope in animal form fights like the animal it resembles, although its bite carries the disease of lycanthropy. It is preternaturally cunning and strong, and possesses damage reduction that is overcome only by silvered weapons. 

Finally, a natural lycanthrope (or an afflicted lycanthrope that has become aware of its affliction) can assume a hybrid form that is a mix of its humanoid and animal forms. A hybrid has hands and can use weapons, but it can also attack with its teeth and claws. A hybrid can spread lycanthropy with its bite, and it has the same damage reduction that its animal form possesses. 

### Werebear

| |Werebear, Human Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Werebear, Bear Form Large Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Werebear, Hybrid Form Large Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|1d8+1 plus 6d8+30 (62 hp)||1d8+1 plus 6d8+30 (62 hp)||1d8+1 plus 6d8+30 (62 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+0||+1||+1|
|**Speed:**|30 ft. (6 squares)||40 ft. (8 squares)||30 ft. (6 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|15 (+2 natural, +3 studded leather armor), touch 10, flat-footed 15||17 (-1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 16||17 (-1 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural) touch 10, flat-footed 16|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+5/+6||+5/+18||+5/+18|
|**Attack:**|Greataxe +6 melee (1d12+1/x3) or throwing axe +5 ranged (1d6+1)||Claw +13 melee (1d8+9)||Greataxe +11 melee (1d12+13/x3); or claw +13 melee (1d6+9)|
|**Full Attack:**|Greataxe +6 melee (1d12+1/x3) or throwing axe +5 ranged (1d6+1)||2 claws +13 melee (1d8+9) and bite +11 melee (2d6+4)||Claw +13 melee (1d6+9) and greataxe +9 melee (1d12+4/x3) and bite +11 melee (1d8+4) or 2 claws +13 melee (1d6+9) and bite +11 melee (1d8+4)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Improved grab, curse of lycanthropy||Curse of lycanthropy|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, bear empathy, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, bear empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, bear empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +8, Ref +5, Will +4||Fort +12, Ref +6, Will +4||Fort +12, Ref +6, Will +4|
|**Abilities:**|Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 29, Dex 13, Con 20, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 29, Dex 13, Con 20, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +1; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +13; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +9; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Endurance\|Endurance]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Monster Feats#Multiattack\|Multiattack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Power Attack\|Power Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Run\|Run]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Track\|Track]] <sup>B</sup>; | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Cold forests||Cold forests||Cold forests|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, family (3-4), or troupe (2-4 plus 1-4 brown bears)||(same as human form)||(same as human form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|5||5||5|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always lawful good||Always lawful good||Always lawful good|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3||+3|

Werebears in humanoid form tend to be stout, well-muscled, and hairy. Their brown hair is thick, and males usually wear beards. They may have reddish, blond, ivory, or black hair, matching the color of the ursine form. They dress in simple cloth and leather garments that are easy to remove, repair, or replace 

#### Combat

Werebears fight just as brown bears do in animal form. In humanoid or hybrid form, they favor large, heavy weapons such as greataxes or greatswords. The werebear's greataxe is a Medium weapon, so it can wield the axe in one hand in hybrid form. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A werebear can assume the form of a brown bear or a bear-humanoid hybrid. 

#### Bear Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with bears and dire bears, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against bears and dire bears. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by a werebear's bite attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, a werebear must be in bear form and must hit with a claw attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. 

#### Skills
Werebears have a +4 racial bonus on Swim checks in any bear form. 

The werebear presented here is a 1st-level human warrior and natural lycanthrope, using the following base ability scores: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Wereboar

| |Wereboar, Human Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Wereboar, Boar Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Wereboar, Hybrid Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|1d8+4 plus 3d8+12 (34 hp)||1d8+4 plus 3d8+12 (34 hp)||1d8+4 plus 3d8+12 (34 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+0||+0||+0|
|**Speed:**|20 ft. in scale mail (4 squares); base speed 30 ft.||40 ft. (8 squares)||30 ft. (6 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|18 (+2 natural, +4 scale mail, +2 heavy shield) touch 10, flat-footed 18||18 (+8 natural) touch 10, flat- footed 18||18 (+8 natural) touch 10, flat-footed 18|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+3/+4||+3/+6||+3/+6|
|**Attack:**|Battleaxe +4 melee (1d8+1/x3) or javelin +3 ranged (1d6+1)||Gore +6 melee (1d8+4)||Battleaxe +6 melee (1d8+4/x3) or claw +6 melee (1d4+3)|
|**Full Attack:**|Battleaxe +4 melee (1d8+1/x3) or javelin +3 ranged (1d6+1)||Gore +6 melee (1d8+4)||Battleaxe +6 melee (1d8+4/x3) and gore +1 melee (1d6+1); or 2 claws +6 melee (1d4+3) and gore +1 melee (1d6+1)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Curse of lycanthropy||Curse of lycanthropy|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, boar empathy, ferocity, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, boar empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, ferocity, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, boar empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, ferocity, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +6, Ref +3, Will +3||Fort +9, Ref +3, Will +3||Fort +9, Ref +3, Will +3|
|**Abilities:**|Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 17, Dex 11, Con 18, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 17, Dex 11, Con 18, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Bull Rush\|Improved Bull Rush]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Power Attack\|Power Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Toughness\|Toughness]] ; | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate forests||Temperate forests||Temperate forests|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, brood (3-4), or troupe (2-4 plus 1-4 boars)||(same as human form)||(same as human form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|4||4||4|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always neutral||Always neutral||Always neutral|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3||+3|

A wereboar in humanoid form tends to be a stocky, muscular individual of average height. It dresses in simple garments that are easy to remove, repair, or replace. 

#### Combat

In any form, wereboars are as ferocious as normal boars. When in hybrid form, they fight with a weapon and their dangerous gore attack. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A wereboar can assume the form of a boar or a boar-humanoid hybrid. 

#### Boar Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with boars and dire boars, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against boars and dire boars. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by the wereboar's gore attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Ferocity (Ex)
A wereboar is such a tenacious combatant that it continues to fight without penalty even while disabled or dying. 

The wereboar presented here is a 1st-level human warrior and natural lycanthrope, using the following base ability scores: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Wererat

| |Wererat, Human Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Wererat, Dire Rat Form Small Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Wererat, Hybrid Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|1d8+1 plus 1d8+2 (12 hp)||1d8+1 plus 1d8+2 (12 hp)||1d8+1 plus 1d8+2 (12 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+0||+3||+3|
|**Speed:**|30 ft. (6 squares)||40 ft. (8 squares), climb 20 ft.||30 ft. (6 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|15 (+2 natural, +2 leather, +1 buckler) touch 10, flat-footed 15||17 (+1 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 14, flat-footed 14||16 (+3 Dex, +3 natural) touch 13, flat-footed 13|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+1/+2||+1/-2||+1/+2|
|**Attack:**|Rapier +2 melee (1d6+1/18-20) or light crossbow +1 ranged (1d8/19-20)||Bite +6 melee (1d4+1 plus disease)||Rapier +5 melee (1d6+1/18-20) or light crossbow +4 ranged (1d8/19-20)|
|**Full Attack:**|Rapier +2 melee (1d6+1/18-20) or light crossbow +1 ranged (1d8/19-20)||Bite +6 melee (1d4+1 plus disease)||Rapier +4 melee (1d6+1/18-20) and bite -1 melee (1d6 plus disease); or light crossbow +4 ranged (1d8/19-20)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Curse of lycanthropy, disease||Curse of lycanthropy, disease|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, rat empathy, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, rat empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, rat empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +5, Ref +2, Will +4||Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +4||Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +4|
|**Abilities:**|Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 13, Dex 17, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 13, Dex 17, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +0, [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +0, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +9; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +11; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +9; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Dodge\|Dodge]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Finesse\|Weapon Finesse]] <sup>B</sup>; | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Any||Any||Any|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, pack (6-10), or troupe (2-5 plus 5-8 dire rats)||(same as human form)||(same as human form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|2||2||2|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always lawful evil||Always lawful evil||Always lawful evil|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3||+3|
A wererat in humanoid form tends to be a thin, wiry individual of shorter than average height. The eyes constantly dart around, and the nose and mouth may twitch if he or she is excited. Males often have thin, ragged mustaches. 

#### Combat

In animal form, wererats avoid combat, preferring to use their dire rat shape for skulking and spying. In hybrid form, a wererat fights with a rapier and light crossbow. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A wererat can assume a bipedal hybrid form or the form of a dire rat. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by a wererat's bite attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Disease (Ex)
Filth fever; bite, Fortitude DC 12, incubation period 1d3 days, damage 1d3 Dex and 1d3 Con. The save DC is Constitution-based. 

#### Rat Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with rats and dire rats, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against rats and dire rats. 

#### Skills
A wererat in rat or hybrid form uses its Dexterity modifier for Climb or Swim checks. It has a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always choose to take 10 on a Climb check, even if rushed or threatened. 

Wererats have a +8 racial bonus on Swim checks from their dire rat form. 

#### Feats
Wererats gain Weapon Finesse as a bonus feat. 

The wererat presented here is based on a 1st-level human warrior who is a natural lycanthrope, using the following base ability scores: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Weretiger

| |Weretiger, Human Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Weretiger, Tiger Form Large Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Weretiger, Hybrid Form Large Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|1d8+1 plus 6d8+18 (50 hp)||1d8+1 plus 6d8+18 (50 hp)||1d8+1 plus 6d8+18 (50 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+4||+6||+6|
|**Speed:**|20 ft. in breastplate (4 squares); base speed 30 ft.||40 ft. (8 squares)||30 ft. (6 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|17 (+2 natural, +5 breastplate) touch 10, flat-footed 17||16 (-1 size, +2 Dex, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 14||16 (-1 size, +2 Dex, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 14|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+5/+6||+5/+16||+5/+16|
|**Attack:**|Glaive +6 melee (1d10+1/x3) or composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) +5 ranged (1d8+1/x3)||Claw +11 melee (1d8+7)||Claw +11 melee (1d8+7)|
|**Full Attack:**|Glaive +6 melee (1d10+1/x3) or composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) +5 ranged (1d8+1/x3)||2 claws +11 melee (1d8+7) and bite +6 melee (2d6+3)||2 claws +11 melee (1d8+7) and bite +6 melee (2d6+3)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft. (10 ft. with glaive)||10 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Pounce, Improved grab, rake, curse of lycanthropy||Curse of lycanthropy|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, tiger empathy, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, tiger empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, tiger empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +8, Ref +5, Will +4||Fort +10, Ref +7, Will +4||Fort +10, Ref +7, Will +4|
|**Abilities:**|Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 25, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 25, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Balance\|Balance]] +0, [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +0, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +0, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Balance\|Balance]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +2*, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Balance\|Balance]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Reflexes\|Combat Reflexes]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats#Improved Natural Attack\|Improved Natural Attack]] (bite, [[3.5 Feat List#Claw)\|Claw)]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>; | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Warm forests||Warm forests||Warm forests|
|**Organization:**|Solitary or pair||(same as human form)||(same as human form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|5||5||5|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always neutral||Always neutral||Always neutral|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3||+3|

Weretigers in humanoid form tend to be sleekly muscular, taller than average, and very agile. 

#### Combat

Weretigers can assume a hybrid form as well as an animal form. In tiger form, they can pounce and grab just as normal tigers do. In hybrid form, they rely on their deadly claws. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A weretiger can assume a bipedal hybrid form or the form of a tiger. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by a weretiger's bite attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, a weretiger in tiger form must hit with a claw or bite attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can rake. 

#### Pounce (Ex)
If a weretiger in tiger form charges an opponent, it can make a full attack, including two rake attacks. 

#### Rake (Ex)
Attack bonus +9 melee, damage 1d8+3. 

#### Tiger Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with tigers and dire tigers, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against tigers and dire tigers. 

#### Skills
In any form, weretigers have a +4 bonus on Balance, Hide, and Move Silently checks. \*In areas of tall grass or heavy undergrowth, the Hide bonus improves to +8 in the tiger form. 

The weretiger presented here is a 1st-level human warrior and natural lycanthrope, using the following base ability scores: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Werewolf

| |Werewolf, Human Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Werewolf, Wolf Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Werewolf, Hybrid Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|1d8+1 plus 2d8+6 (20 hp)||1d8+1 plus 2d8+6 (20 hp)||1d8+1 plus 2d8+6 (20 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+4||+6||+6|
|**Speed:**|30 ft. (6 squares)||50 ft. (10 squares)||30 ft. (6 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|17 (+2 natural, +4 chain shirt, +1 light shield) touch 10, flat-footed 17||16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14||16 (+2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+2/+3||+2/+4||+2/+4|
|**Attack:**|Longsword +3 melee (1d8+1/19-20) or light crossbow +2 ranged (1d8/19-20)||Bite +5 melee (1d6+3)||Claw +4 melee (1d4+2)|
|**Full Attack:**|Longsword +3 melee (1d8+1/19-20) or light crossbow +2 ranged (1d8/19-20)||Bite +5 melee (1d6+3)||2 claws +4 melee (1d4+2) and bite +0 melee (1d6+1)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Curse of lycanthropy, trip||Curse of lycanthropy|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, wolf empathy, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, wolf empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, wolf empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +6, Ref +3, Will +2||Fort +8, Ref +5, Will +2||Fort +8, Ref +5, Will +2|
|**Abilities:**|Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 15, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8||Str 15, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 10, Wis 11, Cha 8|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +2; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +2*; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +2*; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Stealthy\|Stealthy]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Track\|Track]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (bite); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate forests||Temperate forests||Temperate forests|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, pack (6-10), or troupe (2-5 plus 5-8 wolves)||(same as human form)||(same as human form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|3||3||3|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always chaotic evil||Always chaotic evil||Always chaotic evil|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3||+3|

Werewolves in humanoid form have no distinguishing traits. 

#### Combat

In wolf form, a werewolf can trip just as a normal wolf does. A werewolf in hybrid form usually dispenses with weapon attacks, though it can wield a weapon and use its bite as a secondary natural attack. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A werewolf can assume a bipedal hybrid form or the form of a wolf. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by a werewolf's bite attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Trip (Ex)
A werewolf in animal form that hits with a bite attack can attempt to trip the opponent (+2 check modifier) as a free action without making a touch attack or provoking an attack of opportunity. 

If the attempt fails, the opponent cannot react to trip the werewolf. 

#### Wolf Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with wolves and dire wolves, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against wolves and dire wolves. 

#### Skills
\*A werewolf in hybrid or wolf form gains a +4 racial bonus on Survival checks when tracking by scent. 

The werewolf presented here is based on a 1st-level human warrior and natural lycanthrope, using the following base ability scores: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Lycanthrope, Werewolf Lord

| |Werewolf Lord, Human Form Medium Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Werewolf Lord, Dire Wolf Form Large Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)| |Werewolf Lord, Hybrid Form Large Humanoid (Human, Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|10d10+20 plus 6d8+30 (132 hp)||10d10+20 plus 6d8+30 (132 hp)||10d10+20 plus 6d8+30 (132 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+2||+4||+4|
|**Speed:**|30 ft. (6 squares)||40 ft. (8 squares)||30 ft. (6 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|26 (+2 Dex, +3 natural, +6 +2 mithral chain shirt, +5 +3 heavy shield) touch 12, flat-footed 24||19 (-1 size, +4 Dex, +6 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 15||19 (-1 size, +4 Dex, +6 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 15|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+14/+18||+14/+29||+14/+27|
|**Attack:**|+2 bastard sword +21 melee (1d10+8/17-20) or masterwork composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) (2d8+15/17-20) +17 ranged (1d8+4/�3)||Bite +25 melee (2d6+16/19-20)||Claw +24 melee (1d6+11) or +2 bastard sword +27 melee|
|**Full Attack:**|+2 bastard sword +21/+16/+11 melee (1d10+8/17-20) or masterwork composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) +17/+12/+7ranged (1d8+4/�3)||Bite +25 melee (2d6+16/19-20)||2 claws +24 melee (1d6+11) and bite +20 melee (2d6+5/19-20); or +2 bastard sword +27/+22/+17 melee (2d8+15/17-20) and bite +20 melee (2d6+5/19-20)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Curse of lycanthropy||Curse of lycanthropy|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, wolf empathy, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, wolf empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, wolf empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +16, Ref +12, Will +13||Fort +17, Ref +12, Will +11||Fort +17, Ref +12, Will +11|
|**Abilities:**|Str 18, Dex 14, Con 14 Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 12||Str 32, Dex 18, Con 20 Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 12||Str 32, Dex 18, Con 20 Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 12|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +5; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +5*; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Handle Animal\|Handle Animal]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +5*; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Cleave\|Cleave]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Reflexes\|Combat Reflexes]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Exotic Weapon Proficiency\|Exotic Weapon Proficiency]] (bastard Sword), [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Critical\|Improved Critical]] (bastard Sword), [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Critical\|Improved Critical]] (bite), [[3.5 Monster Feats#Improved Natural Armor\|Improved Natural Armor]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats#Improved Natural Attack\|Improved Natural Attack]] (bite), [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Power Attack\|Power Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Run\|Run]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Stealthy\|Stealthy]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Track\|Track]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (bastard Sword), [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (bite), [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Specialization\|Weapon Specialization]] (bastard Sword); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Human Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate forests||Temperate forests||Temperate forests|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, or pack (1-2 werewolf lords plus 2-4 werewolves plus 5-8 wolves)||(same as human form)||(same as human form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|14||14||14|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always chaotic evil||Always chaotic evil||Always chaotic evil|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3||+3|

Stronger, hardier, and more deadly than its lesser fellows, the werewolf lord is a murderous beast that delights in wreaking havoc. 

The werewolf lord presented here is a 10th-level human fighter and natural lycanthrope, using the following base ability scores: Str 16, Dex 14, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 10, Cha 12. 

#### Combat

Werewolf lords can assume a hybrid form as well as an animal form. In dire wolf form, they can trip just as normal wolves do. In hybrid form, they can wield weapons or fight with their claws. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A werewolf lord can assume a bipedal hybrid form or the form of a dire wolf. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by a werewolf lord's bite attack in wolf or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Trip (Ex)
A werewolf lord in dire wolf form that hits with a bite attack can attempt to trip the opponent (+15 check modifier) as a free action without making a touch attack or provoking an attack of opportunity. If the attempt fails, the opponent cannot react to trip the werewolf lord. 

#### Wolf Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with wolves and dire wolves, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against wolves and dire wolves. 

#### Skills
\*A werewolf lord in hybrid or wolf form gains a +4 racial bonus on Survival checks when tracking by scent. 

*Possessions: +2 mithral chain shirt, +3 heavy shield, +2 bastard sword, gauntlets of ogre power, cloak of resistance +2,* masterwork composite longbow (+4 Str bonus). 

### Hill Giant Dire Wereboar

| |Hill Giant Dire Wereboar, Giant Form Large Giant (Shapechanger)| |Hill Giant Dire Wereboar, Dire Boar Form Large Giant (Shapechanger)| |Hill Giant Dire Wearboar, Hybrid Boar Form Large Giant (Shapechanger)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|12d8+51 plus 7d8+49 (185 hp)||12d8+51 plus 7d8+49 (185 hp)||12d8+51 plus 7d8+49 (185 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|-1||-1||-1|
|**Speed:**|30 ft. in hide armor (6 squares); base speed 40 ft.||40 ft. (8 squares)||40 ft. (8 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|22 (-1 size, -1 Dex, +11 natural, +3 hide armor), touch 8, flat-footed 22||16 (-1 size, -1 Dex, +8 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 16||19 (-1 size, -1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 8, flat-footed 19|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+14/+25||+14/+33||+14/+33|
|**Attack:**|Greatclub +21 melee (2d8+10) or slam +20 melee (1d4+7) or rock +12 ranged (2d6+7)||Gore +28 melee (1d8+22)||Greatclub +29 melee (2d8+22) or claw +28 melee (1d6+15)|
|**Full Attack:**|Greatclub +21/+16 melee (2d8+10) or 2 slams +20 melee (1d4+7) or rock +12 ranged (2d6+7)||Gore +28 melee (1d8+22)||Greatclub +29 melee (2d8+22) and gore +23 melee (1d8+7); or 2 claws +28 melee (1d6+15) and gore +23 melee (1d8+7)|
|**Space/Reach:**|10 ft./10 ft.||10 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|Rock throwing||Curse of lycanthropy||Curse of lycanthropy|
|**Special Qualities:**|Alternate form, boar empathy, ferocity, low-light vision, rock catching, scent||Alternate form, boar empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, ferocity, low-light vision, scent||Alternate form, boar empathy, damage reduction 10/silver, ferocity, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +17, Ref +8, Will +12||Fort +20, Ref +8, Will +12||Fort +20, Ref +8, Will +12|
|**Abilities:**|Str 25, Dex 8, Con 19, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 7||Str 41, Dex 8, Con 25, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 7||Str 41, Dex 8, Con 25, Int 6, Wis 12, Cha 7|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +12; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +18, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +22, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +12; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +18, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +22, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +12; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Cleave\|Cleave]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Endurance\|Endurance]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Bull Rush\|Improved Bull Rush]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Sunder\|Improved Sunder]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] <sup>B</sup>, [[3.5 Feat List#Power Attack\|Power Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (greatclub); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Giant Form); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] (same As Giant Form); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate hills||Temperate hills||Temperate hills|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, brood (3-4), or troupe (2-4 plus 1-4 dire boars)||(same as giant form)||(same as giant form)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|11||11||11|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard||Standard|
|**Alignment:**|Always neutral||Always neutral||Always neutral|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+7||+7||+7|

Dire wereboars in giant form look much like normal hill giants, though slightly stockier, and with coarser, stiffer hair and stiff. The dire wereboar described here is based on a hill giant and natural lycanthrope with normal ability scores for a hill giant. 

#### Combat

Dire wereboars anger quickly. They usually begin a battle in giant form, then switch to hybrid form to take advantage of their immense strength in that shape. They like to use their Improved Bull Rush and Improved Sunder feats to shove opponents around and smash their weapons and shields. 

#### Alternate Form (Su)
A dire wereboar can assume a bipedal hybrid form or the form of a dire boar. 

#### Boar Empathy (Ex)
Communicate with boars and dire boars, and +4 racial bonus on Charisma-based checks against boars and dire boars. 

#### Curse of Lycanthropy (Su)
Any humanoid or giant hit by a dire wereboar's bite attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. 

#### Ferocity (Ex)
A dire wereboar is such a tenacious combatant that it continues to fight without penalty even while disabled or dying. 

#### Creating a Lycanthrope

"Lycanthrope" is a template that can be added to any humanoid or giant (referred to hereafter as the base creature). The lycanthrope template can be inherited (for natural lycanthropes) or acquired (for afflicted lycanthropes). Becoming a lycanthrope is very much like multiclassing as an animal and gaining the appropriate Hit Dice. 

#### Size and Type
The base creature's type does not change, but the creature gains the shapechanger subtype. The lycanthrope takes on the characteristics of some type of carnivorous or omnivorous creature of the animal type (referred to hereafter as the base animal). 

This animal can be any predator, scavenger, or omnivore whose size is within one size category of the base creature's size (Small, Medium, or Large for a Medium base creature). Lycanthropes can also adopt a hybrid shape that combines features of the base creature and the base animal. A lycanthrope's hybrid form is the same size as the base animal or the base creature, whichever is larger. 

A lycanthrope uses either the base creature's or the base animal's statistics and special abilities in addition to those described here. 

#### Hit Dice and Hit Points
Same as the base creature plus those of the base animal. To calculate total hit points, apply Constitution modifiers according to the score the lycanthrope has in each form. 

#### Speed
Same as the base creature or base animal, depending on which form the lycanthrope is using. Hybrids use the base creature's speed. 

#### Armor Class
The base creature's natural armor bonus increases by +2 in all forms. In hybrid form, the lycanthrope's natural armor bonus is equal to the natural armor bonus of the base animal or the base creature, whichever is better. 

#### Base Attack/Grapple
Add the base attack bonus for the base animal to the base attack bonus for the base creature. The lycanthrope's grapple bonus uses its attack bonus and modifiers for Strength and size depending on the lycanthrope's form. 

#### Attacks
Same as the base creature or base animal, depending on which form the lycanthrope is using. A lycanthrope in hybrid form gains two claw attacks and a bite attack as natural weapons. 

These weapons deal damage based on the hybrid form's size. A hybrid may attack with a weapon and a bite, or may attack with its natural weapons. The bite attack of a hybrid is a secondary attack. 

|Hybrid Size|Claw|Bite|
|---|---|---|
|Small|1d3|1d4|
|Medium|1d4|1d6|
|Large|1d6|1d8|
|Huge|2d4|2d6|

#### Damage
Same as the base creature or base animal, depending on which form the lycanthrope is in. 

#### Special Attacks
A lycanthrope retains the special attacks of the base creature or base animal, depending on which form it is using, and also gains the special attacks described below. 

A lycanthrope's hybrid form does not gain any special attacks of the base animal. A lycanthrope spellcaster cannot cast spells with verbal, somatic, or material components while in animal form, or spells with verbal components while in hybrid form. 

***Curse of Lycanthropy (Su):***Any humanoid or giant hit by a natural lycanthrope's bite attack in animal or hybrid form must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or contract lycanthropy. If the victim's size is not within one size category of the lycanthrope the victim cannot contract lycanthropy from that lycanthrope. Afflicted lycanthropes cannot pass on the curse of lycanthropy. 

#### Special Qualities
A lycanthrope retains all the special qualities of the base creature and the base animal, and also gains those described below. 

***Alternate Form (Su):***A lycanthrope can shift into animal form as though using the *polymorph* spell on itself, though its gear is not affected, it does not regain hit points for changing form, and only the specific animal form indicated for the lycanthrope can be assumed. It does not assume the ability scores of the animal, but instead adds the animal's physical ability score modifiers to its own ability scores. A lycanthrope also can assume a bipedal hybrid form with prehensile hands and animalistic features. 

Changing to or from animal or hybrid form is a standard action. 

A slain lycanthrope reverts to its humanoid form, although it remains dead. Separated body parts retain their animal form, however. 

Afflicted lycanthropes find this ability difficult to control (see Lycanthropy as an Affliction, below), but natural lycanthropes have full control over this power. 

***Damage Reduction (Ex):*** An afflicted lycanthrope in animal or hybrid form has damage reduction 5/silver. A natural lycanthrope in animal or hybrid form has damage reduction 10/silver. 

***Lycanthropic Empathy (Ex):***In any form, lycanthropes can communicate and empathize with normal or dire animals of their animal form. This gives them a +4 racial bonus on checks when influencing the animal's attitude and allows the communication of simple concepts and (if the animal is friendly) commands, such as "friend," "foe," "flee," and "attack." 

***Low-Light Vision (Ex):*** A lycanthrope has low-light vision in any form. 

***Scent (Ex):*** A lycanthrope has the scent ability in any form. 

#### Base Save Bonuses
Add the base save bonuses of the base animal to the base save bonuses of the base creature. 

#### Abilities
All lycanthropes gain +2 to Wisdom. In addition, when in animal form, a lycanthrope's physical ability scores improve according to its kind, as set out in the table below. These adjustments are equal to the animal's normal ability scores --10 or --11. A lycanthrope in hybrid form modifies its physical ability scores by the same amount. 

In addition, a lycanthrope may also gain an additional ability score increase by virtue of its extra Hit Dice. 

#### Skills
A lycanthrope gains skill points equal to (2 + Int modifier, minimum 1) per Hit Die of its animal form, as if it had multiclassed into the animal type. (Animal is never its first Hit Die, though, and it does not gain quadruple skill points for any animal Hit Die.) Any skill given in the animal's description is a class skill for the lycanthrope's animal levels. In any form, a lycanthrope also has any racial skill bonuses of the base creature and of the base animal, although conditional skill bonuses only apply in the associated form. 

#### Feats
Add the base animal's feats to the base creature's. If this results in a lycanthrope having the same feat twice, the lycanthrope gains no additional benefit unless the feat normally can be taken more once, in which case the duplicated feat works as noted in the feat description. This process may give the lycanthrope more feats than a character of its total Hit Dice would normally be entitled to; if this occurs, any "extra" feats are denoted as bonus feats. 

It's possible that a lycanthrope cannot meet the prerequisites for all its feats when in humanoid form. If this occurs, the lycanthrope still has the feats, but cannot use them when in humanoid form. A lycanthrope receives Iron Will as a bonus feat. 

#### Environment
Same as either the base creature or base animal. 

#### Organization
Solitary or pair, sometimes family (3--4), pack (6--10), or troupe (family plus related animals) 

#### Challenge Rating
By class level or base creature, modified according to the HD of the base animal: 1 HD or 2 HD, +2; 3 HD to 5 HD, +3; 6 HD to 10 HD, +4; 11 HD to 20 HD, +5; 21 or more HD, +6. 

#### Treasure
Standard. 

#### Alignment
Any. Noble creatures such as bears, eagles, and lions tend to produce good-aligned lycanthropes. Sinister creatures such as rats, snakes, and wolves tend to produce evil-aligned lycanthropes. This is a reflection of how these animals are perceived, not any innate quality of the animal itself, so the alignment of the animal form can be arbitrarily assigned. 

#### Advancement
By character class. 

#### Level Adjustment
Same as the base creature +2 (afflicted) or +3 (natural). In addition, a lycanthrope's character level is increased by the number of racial Hit Dice the base animal has. 

**Common Lycanthropes** 

|Name|Animal Form|Animal or Hybrid Form Ability Modifiers|Preferred Alignment|
|---|---|---|---|
|Werebear|Brown bear|Str +16, Dex +2, Con +8|Lawful good|
|Wereboar|Boar|Str +4, Con +6|Neutral|
|Wererat|Dire rat|Dex +6, Con +2|Chaotic evil|
|Weretiger|Tiger|Str +12, Dex +4, Con +6|Neutral|
|Werewolf|Wolf|Str +2, Dex +4, Con +4|Chaotic evil|
|Dire wereboar|Dire boar|Str +16, Con +6|Neutral|

#### Lycanthropy as an Affliction

When a character contracts lycanthropy through a lycanthrope's bite (see above), no symptoms appear until the first night of the next full moon. On that night, the afflicted character involuntarily assumes animal form and forgets his or her own identity, temporarily becoming an NPC. The character remains in animal form, assuming the appropriate alignment, until the next dawn. 

The character's actions during this first episode are dictated by the alignment of its animal form. The character remembers nothing about the entire episode (or subsequent episodes) unless he succeeds on a DC 15 Wisdom check, in which case he becomes aware of his lycanthropic condition. 

Thereafter, the character is subject to involuntary transformation under the full moon and whenever damaged in combat. He or she feels an overwhelming rage building up and must succeed on a Control Shape check (see below) to resist changing into animal form. Any player character not yet aware of his or her lycanthropic condition temporarily becomes an NPC during an involuntary change, and acts according to the alignment of his or her animal form. 

A character with awareness of his condition retains his identity and does not lose control of his actions if he changes. However, each time he changes to his animal form, he must make a Will save (DC 15 + number of times he has been in animal form) or permanently assume the alignment of his animal form in all shapes. 

Once a character becomes aware of his affliction, he can now voluntarily attempt to change to animal or hybrid form, using the appropriate Control Shape check DC. An attempt is a standard action and can be made each round. Any voluntary change to animal or hybrid form immediately and permanently changes the character's alignment to that of the appropriate lycanthrope. 

#### Changing Form

Changing form is a standard action. If the change is involuntary, the character performs the change on his next turn following the triggering event. Changing to animal or hybrid form ruins the character's armor and clothing (including any items worn) if the new form is larger than the character's natural form; carried items are simply dropped. Characters can hastily doff clothing while changing, but not armor. Magic armor survives the change if it succeeds on a DC 15 Fortitude save. An afflicted character who is not aware of his condition remains in animal form until the next dawn. An afflicted character who is aware of his or her condition (see above) can try to resume humanoid form following a change (voluntary or involuntary) with a Control Shape check, but if he fails his check, he remains in animal (or hybrid) form until the following dawn. 

#### Curing Lycanthropy

An afflicted character who eats a sprig of belladonna (also called wolfsbane) within 1 hour of a lycanthrope's attack can attempt a DC 20 Fortitude save to shake off the affliction. If a healer administers the herb, use the character's save bonus or the healer's Heal modifier, whichever is higher. The character gets only one chance, no matter how much belladonna is consumed. The belladonna must be reasonably fresh (picked within the last week). 

However, fresh or not, belladonna is toxic. The character must succeed on a DC 13 Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of Strength damage. One minute later, the character must succeed on a second DC 13 save or take an additional 2d6 points of Strength damage. 

A *remove disease* or *heal* spell cast by a cleric of 12th level or higher also cures the affliction, provided the character receives the spell within three days of the lycanthrope's attack. 

The only other way to remove the affliction is to cast *remove curse* or *break enchantment* on the character during one of the three days of the full moon. After receiving the spell, the character must succeed on a DC 20 Will save to break the curse (the caster knows if the spell works). If the save fails, the process must be repeated. 

Characters undergoing this cure are often kept bound or confined in cages until the cure takes effect. 

Only afflicted lycanthropes can be cured of lycanthropy. 

#### Lycanthropes as Characters

Becoming a lycanthrope does not change a character's favored class but usually changes alignment (see above). This alignment change may cause characters of certain classes to lose some of their class features. 

Lycanthrope characters possess the following racial traits. 

-  +2 Wisdom. Physical abilities are increased by the animal form's
ability modifiers when a lycanthrope changes to its hybrid or animal forms. 

- Size same as the base creature or the base animal form.

- Low-light vision in any form.

- Scent in any form.

- Racial Hit Dice: A lycanthrope adds the Hit Dice of its animal form
to its base Hit Dice for race, level, and class. These additional Hit Dice modify the lycanthrope's base attack bonus and base saving throw bonuses accordingly. 

- Racial Skills: A lycanthrope adds skill points for its animal Hit
Dice much as if it had multiclassed into the animal type. It gains skill points equal to (2 + Int modifier, minimum 1) per Hit Die of the animal form. Any skills that appear in the animal's description are treated as class skills for the lycanthrope's animal levels. The lycanthrope's maximum skill ranks are equal to its animal form Hit Dice + its racial Hit Dice (if any) + its class levels + 3. Any racial skill adjustments of the lycanthrope's base race and its animal form (but not conditional adjustments) are added to its skill modifiers in any form. 

- Racial Feats: Add the animal's Hit Dice to the base character's own
Hit Dice to determine how many feats the character has. All lycanthropes gain Iron Will as a bonus feat. 

-  +2 natural armor bonus in any form.

- Special Qualities (see above): Alternate form, lycanthropic empathy,
curse of lycanthropy (in animal or hybrid form only). 

- Afflicted lycanthrope: damage reduction 5/silver (in animal or hybrid
form only). 

- Natural lycanthrope: damage reduction 10/silver (in animal or hybrid
form only). 

- Automatic Languages: As base creature.

- Favored Class: Same as the base creature.

- Level adjustment: Same as the base creature +2 (afflicted) or +3
(natural). 

#### Control Shape (Wis)

Any character who has contracted lycanthropy and is aware of his condition can learn Control Shape as a class skill. (An afflicted lycanthrope not yet aware of his condition can attempt Control Shape checks untrained.) This skill determines whether an afflicted lycanthrope can control his shape. A natural lycanthrope does not need this skill, since it has full control over its shape. 

#### Check (Involuntary Change)
An afflicted character must make a check at moonrise each night of the full moon to resist involuntarily assuming animal form. An injured character must also check for an involuntary change after accumulating enough damage to reduce his hit points by one-quarter and again after each additional one-quarter lost. 

|Involuntary Change|Control Shape DC|
|---|---|
|Resist involuntary change|25|

On a failed check, the character must remain in animal form until the next dawn, when he automatically returns to his base form. A character aware of his condition may make one attempt to return to humanoid form (see below), but if he fails, he remains in animal form until the next dawn. 

#### Retry (Involuntary Change)
Check to resist an involuntary change once each time a triggering event occurs. 

#### Check (Voluntary Change)
In addition, an afflicted lycanthrope aware of his condition may attempt to use this skill voluntarily in order to change to animal form, assume hybrid form, or return to humanoid form, regardless of the state of the moon or whether he has been injured. 

|Involuntary Change|Control Shape DC|
|---|---|
|Return to humanoid form (full moon<sup>*</sup>)|25|
|Return to humanoid form (not full moon)|20|
|Assume hybrid form|15|
|Voluntary change to animal form (full moon)|15|
|Voluntary change to animal form (not full moon)|20|
|* For game purposes, the full moon lasts three days every month.|

#### Retry (Voluntary Change)
A character can retry voluntary changes to animal form or hybrid form as often as he likes. Each attempt is a standard action. However, on a failed check to return to humanoid form, the character must remain in animal or hybrid form until the next dawn, when he automatically returns to humanoid form. 

#### Special
An afflicted lycanthrope cannot attempt a voluntary change until it becomes aware of its condition (see Lycanthropy as an Affliction). 


**[[3.5 Monsters - M|Next: Monsters M.]]
