---
lang: en
title: 3.5 Compendium / Monsters / 3.5 Monsters - I
aliases: 3.5 Monsters - I
tags: 3-5e/rules/monsters
---

# MONSTERS I

**[[3.5 Monsters - H|Previous: Monsters H.]]

## Inevitable

Inevitables are constructs whose sole aim is to enforce the natural laws of the universe. 

Each type of inevitable is designed to find and punish a particular kind of transgression, hunting down a person or group that has violated a fundamental principle. When an inevitable is created, it receives its first mission, then finds the transgressors and metes out appropriate punishment. The sentence is usually death, although some inevitables insist on compensation to the wronged party instead, using *geas* and *mark of justice* to ensure compliance. From its first step, an inevitable focuses totally on its target. It continues its efforts no matter how cold the trail or hopeless the task. Inevitables are single-minded in pursuit of their quarry, but they are under orders to leave innocents alone. Accomplices to their prey are fair game, however, which sometimes creates conflicts within their programming. 

Inevitables gladly sacrifice themselves to complete a mission, but they aren't suicidal. Faced with impending defeat, they are likely to withdraw and seek a way to even the odds. They are determined but patient foes. They ally with others if that helps accomplish their mission, but they have a hard time keeping allies for long. 

Inevitables tend to stick out in a crowd while they're in observation mode, but they seem oblivious to the attention. Their forms vary, but all inevitables are gold-and-silver clockwork creatures, with gears and pistons where muscles would be on flesh-and-blood creatures. Their eyes glow with a golden radiance. 

Note that unlike most constructs, inevitables have an Intelligence score and can think, learn, and remember. 

Inevitables speak Abyssal, Celestial, Infernal, and the native language of their first target. 

#### Combat

Unless their very existence is threatened, inevitables focus completely on the transgressor they've been assigned to, ignoring other combatants completely. An inevitable might attack anyone who hinders its progress, but it won't tarry beyond the point where it can reengage its quarry. Inevitables take self-defense very seriously; anyone who attacks an inevitable with what the creature perceives as deadly force is met with deadly force in return. 

An inevitable's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Fast Healing (Ex)
An inevitable heals a certain amount of damage each round (specified in each variety's description) as long as it has at least 1 hit point. However, damage dealt by chaotic weapons heals at the normal rate. 

### Kolyarut



|  | Medium Construct (Extraplanar, Lawful) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 13d10+20 (91 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 20 ft. in banded mail (4 squares); base speed 30 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 27 (+1 Dex, +10 natural, +6 banded mail) touch 11, flat-footed 26 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +9/+11 | 
| Attack: | Vampiric touch +11 melee touch (5d6) or enervation ray +10 ranged touch (as spell) or *+2 longsword* +13 melee (1d8+5/19--20) or slam +11 melee (1d6+3) | 
| Full Attack: | Vampiric touch +11/+6 melee touch (5d6) or enervation ray +10 ranged touch (as spell) or *+2 longsword* +13/+8 melee (1d8+5/19--20) or slam +11/+6 melee (1d6+3) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Enervation ray, spell-like abilities, vampiric touch | 
| Special Qualities: | Construct traits, damage reduction 10/chaotic, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5, low-light vision, spell resistance 22 | 
| Saves: | Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +7 | 
| Abilities: | Str 14, Dex 13, Con ---, Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 16 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Disguise\|Disguise]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Gather Information\|Gather Information]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +3 (+5 Following Tracks); | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Casting\|Combat Casting]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Great Fortitude\|Great Fortitude]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Lightning Reflexes\|Lightning Reflexes]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Quickened Spell-Like Ability\|Quickened Spell-Like Ability]] (*suggestion*); | 
| Environment: | A lawful-aligned plane | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 12 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always lawful neutral | 
| Advancement: | 14--22 HD (Medium); 23--39 HD (Large) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
Kolyaruts mete out punishment to those who break bargains and oaths. 

Before beginning a mission against a deal-breaker, a kolyarut learns as much about the contract or oath as possible. It's not interested in those who break deals accidentally or against their will--- only those who willingly break contracts violate the principle that kolyaruts are created to uphold. If a written contract was broken, the kolyarut typically carries a copy of the contract with it. 

Kolyaruts are the most talkative of the inevitables, making credible attempts at social niceties such as proper greetings before getting down to the matter at hand. They can use *disguise self* to appear as almost any kind of humanoid---useful if they need to go undercover to catch their quarry. 

#### Combat

Like all inevitables, a kolyarut is patient enough to study a target before striking. It has a good idea of the deal-breaker's abilities and defenses before it enters battle. When it fights, it tries to get the conflict over as soon as possible, minimizing excess bloodshed and mayhem. It doesn't let concern for innocents delay or endanger its mission, however. 

A kolyarut's favorite tactic is to use *invisibility* or *disguise self* to sneak close, then eliminate the quarry with its vampiric touch ability before it can react. A kolyarut has no compunctions about using its vampiric touch ability on allies to increase its own power, if doing so helps it complete its mission. 

A kolyarut's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Enervation Ray (Su)
A kolyarut can fire a black enervation ray at targets within 200 feet. The effect is identical with the *enervation* spell (caster level 13th). 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Discern Lies\|Discern Lies]] (DC 17), [[3.5 Spell List#Disguise Self\|Disguise Self]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Fear\|Fear]] (DC 17), [[3.5 Spell List#Hold Person\|Hold Person]] (DC 16), [[3.5 Spell List#Invisibility\|Invisibility]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Locate Creature\|Locate Creature]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Suggestion\|Suggestion]] (DC 16);
 - **1/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Hold Monster\|Hold Monster]] (DC 17), [[3.5 Spell List#Mark Of Justice\|Mark Of Justice]] ;
 - * Caster level 13th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

### Vampiric Touch (Su)
As a melee touch attack, a kolyarut can steal life force from its foe, as the *vampiric touch* spell (caster level 13th). 

#### Skills
A kolyarut has a +4 racial bonus on Disguise, Gather Information, and Sense Motive checks. 

### Marut



|  | Large Construct (Extraplanar, Lawful) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 15d10+30 (112 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. in full plate armor (6 squares); base speed 40 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 34 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +16 natural, +8 full plate armor), touch 10, flat-footed 33 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +11/+27 | 
| Attack: | Slam +22 melee (2d6+12 plus 3d6 sonic or 3d6 electricity) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 slams +22 melee (2d6+12 plus 3d6 sonic or 3d6 electricity) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Fists of thunder and lightning, spell-like abilities | 
| Special Qualities: | Construct traits, damage reduction 15/chaotic, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 10, low-light vision, spell resistance 25 | 
| Saves: | Fort +7, Ref +6, Will +8 | 
| Abilities: | Str 35, Dex 13, Con ---, Int 12, Wis 17, Cha 18 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (religion) +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +16, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +16, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +3 (+5 Following Tracks); | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Ability Focus\|Ability Focus]] (fists), [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Awesome Blow\|Awesome Blow]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Combat Casting\|Combat Casting]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Great Fortitude\|Great Fortitude]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Improved Bull Rush\|Improved Bull Rush]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Power Attack\|Power Attack]] ; | 
| Environment: | A lawful-aligned plane | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 15 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always lawful neutral | 
| Advancement: | 16--28 HD (Large); 29--45 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
Maruts confront those who would try to deny the grave itself. 

Any who use unnatural means to extend their life span could be targeted by a marut. Those who take extraordinary measures to cheat death in some other way might be labeled transgressors as well. Those who use magic to reverse death aren't worthy of a marut's attention unless they do so repeatedly or on a massive scale. 

When a marut has identified its target, it walks surely and implacably toward the foe, never resting. 

#### Combat

Once it has found its target, a marut brings it the death it has been trying to avoid. Those who defile death through necromancy may instead receive a *geas* and/or *mark of justice* to enforce proper respect. It typically uses *wall of force* to shut off any escape routes, then opens up with *chain lightning* while it closes to melee range. Once there, it strikes with its massive fists, using *circle of death* if beset by numbers of defenders. It hits spellcasting opponents with repeated uses of *greater dispel magic,* and it uses *dimension door* and *locate creature* to track down foes who flee. 

A marut's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

### Fists of Thunder and Lightning (Su)
A marut's left fist delivers a loud thunderclap whenever it hits something, dealing an extra 3d6 points of sonic damage and causing the target to be deafened for 2d6 rounds (Fortitude DC 31 negates the deafness). Its right fist delivers a shock for an extra 3d6 points of electricity damage, and the flash of lightning causes the target to be blinded for 2d6 rounds (Fortitude DC 31 negates the blindness). The save DCs are Strength-based and include the marut's Ability Focus feat. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Air Walk\|Air Walk]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Dimension Door\|Dimension Door]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Fear\|Fear]] (DC 18), [[3.5 Spell List#Command, Greater\|Command, Greater]] (DC 19), [[3.5 Spell List#Dispel Magic, Greater\|Dispel Magic, Greater]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Inflict Light Wounds, Mass\|Inflict Light Wounds, Mass]] (DC 19), [[3.5 Spell List#Locate Creature\|Locate Creature]] , [[3.5 Spell List#True Seeing\|True Seeing]] ;
 - **1/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Chain Lightning\|Chain Lightning]] (DC 20), [[3.5 Spell List#Circle Of Death\|Circle Of Death]] (DC 20), [[3.5 Spell List#Mark Of Justice\|Mark Of Justice]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Wall Of Force\|Wall Of Force]] ;
 -  Caster level 14th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

#### Skills
A marut has a +4 racial bonus on Concentration, Listen, and Spot checks. 

### Zelekhut



|  | Large Construct (Extraplanar, Lawful) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 8d10+30 (74 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +0 | 
| Speed: | 35 ft. in plate barding (7 squares), fly 40 ft. (average) in plate barding (8 squares); base speed 50 ft., fly 60 ft. (average) | 
| Armor Class: | 27 (--1 size, +10 natural, +8 plate barding), touch 9, flat-footed 27 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +6/+15 | 
| Attack: | Spiked chain +10 melee (2d6+5 plus 1d6 electricity) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 spiked chains +10 melee (2d6+5 plus 1d6 electricity) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Spell-like abilities | 
| Special Qualities: | Construct traits, damage reduction 10/chaotic, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 5, low-light vision, spell resistance 20 | 
| Saves: | Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +5 | 
| Abilities: | Str 21, Dex 11, Con ---, Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 15 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +3 (+5 Following Tracks); | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Great Fortitude\|Great Fortitude]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Ride-By Attack\|Ride-By Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Spirited Charge\|Spirited Charge]] ; | 
| Environment: | A lawful-aligned plane | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 9 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always lawful neutral | 
| Advancement: | 9--16 HD (Large); 17--24 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | +7 | 
Zelekhuts are charged with hunting down those who would deny justice---especially those who flee to escape punishment. Expert trackers, they use a combination of natural skill and magic to find fugitives wherever they may hide. 

A zelekhut may initially appear rather non-threatening---but when it is about to enter combat, it can cause two spiked chains to spring forth from its forearms as a free action. In similar fashion, it can cause a pair of golden metallic wings to emerge from its back. Retracting the chains or the wings is also a free action. 

#### Combat

Once it has found its fugitive, a zelekhut uses its speed and its spell-like abilities to cover the most likely escape routes. Then it immobilizes any defenders while attempting to protect any innocent bystanders. Finally, it apprehends the fugitive with its spiked chains, tripping or disarming the foe as needed. 

A zelekhut's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Clairaudience/clairvoyance\|Clairaudience/clairvoyance]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Dimensional Anchor\|Dimensional Anchor]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Dispel Magic\|Dispel Magic]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Fear\|Fear]] (DC 16), [[3.5 Spell List#Hold Person\|Hold Person]] (DC 15), [[3.5 Spell List#Locate Creature\|Locate Creature]] , [[3.5 Spell List#True Seeing\|True Seeing]] ;
 - **3/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Hold Monster\|Hold Monster]] (DC 17), [[3.5 Spell List#Mark Of Justice\|Mark Of Justice]] ;
 -  Caster level 8th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

#### Skills
A zelekhut has a +4 racial bonus on Search and Sense Motive checks. 

#### Feats
Due to its centaur-like construction, a zelekhut qualifies for feats as if it had the Mounted Combat feat. 

## Invisible Stalker



|  | Large Elemental (Air, Extraplanar) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 8d8+16 (52 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +8 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares), fly 30 ft. (perfect) | 
| Armor Class: | 17 (--1 size, +4 Dex, +4 natural), touch 13, flat-footed 13 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +6/+14 | 
| Attack: | Slam +10 melee (2d6+4) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 slams +10 melee (2d6+4) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., elemental traits, natural invisibility, improved tracking | 
| Saves: | Fort +4, Ref +10, Will +4 | 
| Abilities: | Str 18, Dex 19, Con 14, Int 14, Wis 15, Cha 11 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +15, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +2 (+4 Following Tracks); | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Reflexes\|Combat Reflexes]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (slam); | 
| Environment: | Elemental Plane of Air | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 7 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Usually neutral | 
| Advancement: | 9--12 HD (Large); 13--24 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
Invisible stalkers are creatures native to the Elemental Plane of Air. They sometimes serve wizards and sorcerers, who summon them to perform specific tasks. 

A summoned invisible stalker undertakes whatever task the summoner commands, even if the task sends it hundreds or thousands of miles away. The creature follows a command until the task is completed and obeys only the summoner. However, it resents protracted missions or complex tasks and seeks to pervert its instructions accordingly. 

Invisible stalkers have an amorphous form. A *see invisibility* spell shows only a dim outline of a cloud, while a *true seeing* spell reveals a roiling cloud of vapor. 

These creatures speak only Auran but can understand Common. 

#### Combat

An invisible stalker attacks by using the air itself as a weapon. It creates a sudden, intense blast of wind that pounds a single target on the same plane as the creature. 

An invisible stalker can be killed only when it is on the Elemental Plane of Air. When performing a task elsewhere, it automatically returns to its home plane when it takes damage sufficient to destroy it. 

#### Natural Invisibility (Su)
This ability is constant, allowing a stalker to remain invisible even when attacking. This ability is inherent and not subject to the *invisibility purge* spell. 

#### Improved Tracking (Ex)
An invisible stalker is a consummate tracker and makes Spot checks instead of the usual Survival checks to trace a creature's passage. 

**[[3.5 Monsters - K|Next: Monsters K.]]
