---
lang: en
title: 3.5 Compendium / Monsters / 3.5 Monsters - H
aliases: 3.5 Monsters - H
tags: 3-5e/rules/monsters
---

# MONSTERS H

**[[3.5 Monsters - G|Previous: Monsters G.]]

## Hag

Although different hags are unique in appearance and mannerism, they have many aspects in common. All take the form of crones whose bent shapes belie their fierce power and swiftness. 

Hags speak Giant and Common. 

#### Combat

Hags are tremendously strong. They are naturally resistant to spells and can cast magic of their own. Hags often gather to form coveys. A covey, usually containing one hag of each type, can use powers beyond those of the individual members. 

### Annis



|  | Large Monstrous Humanoid | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 7d8+14 (45 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 40 ft. (8 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 20 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 19 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +7/+18 | 
| Attack: | Claw +13 melee (1d6+7) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +13 melee (1d6+7) and bite +8 melee (1d6+3) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Improved grab, rake 1d6+7, rend 2d6+10, spell-like abilities | 
| Special Qualities: | Damage reduction 2/bludgeoning, darkvision 60 ft., spell resistance 19 | 
| Saves: | Fort +6, Ref +6, Will +6 | 
| Abilities: | Str 25, Dex 12, Con 14, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 10 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Bluff\|Bluff]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Disguise\|Disguise]] +0 (+2 Acting), [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +10; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Blind-Fight\|Blind-Fight]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Great Fortitude\|Great Fortitude]] ; | 
| Environment: | Cold marshes | 
| Organization: | Solitary or covey (3 hags of any kind plus 1--8 ogres and 1--4 evil giants) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 6 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually chaotic evil | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
An annis commonly uses its *disguise self* ability to take the form of an exceptionally tall human, a fair giant, or an ogre. 

An annis stands some 8 feet tall and weighs about 325 pounds. 

#### Combat

Though physically powerful, these hags do not favor simple assaults but try to divide and confuse their foes before combat. They love to pose as commoners or gentlefolk to lull their victims into a sense of false security before they attack. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, an annis must hit a Large or smaller opponent with a claw attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. 

#### Rake (Ex)
Attack bonus +13 melee, damage 1d6+7. An annis can attack a grappled foe with both claws at no penalty. 

#### Rend (Ex)
An annis that hits with both claw attacks latches onto the opponent's body and tears the flesh. This attack automatically deals an extra 2d6+10 points of damage. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **3/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Disguise Self\|Disguise Self]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Fog Cloud\|Fog Cloud]] ;
 - * Caster level 8th.

### Green Hag



|  | Medium Monstrous Humanoid | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 9d8+9 (49 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares), swim 30 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 22 (+1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 21 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +9/+13 | 
| Attack: | Claw +13 melee (1d4+4) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +13 melee (1d4+4) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Spell-like abilities, weakness, mimicry | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 90 ft., spell resistance 18 | 
| Saves: | Fort +6, Ref +7, Will +7 | 
| Abilities: | Str 19, Dex 12, Con 12, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 14 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Craft Or Knowledge\|Craft Or Knowledge]] (any One) +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +11 Swim +12; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Blind-Fight\|Blind-Fight]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Casting\|Combat Casting]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Great Fortitude\|Great Fortitude]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate marshes | 
| Organization: | Solitary or covey (3 hags of any kind plus 1--8 ogres and 1--4 evil giants) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 5 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually chaotic evil | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
Green hags are found in desolate swamps and dark forests. 

A green hag is about the same height and weight as a female human. 

#### Combat

Green hags prefer to attack from hiding, usually after distracting foes. They often use darkvision to their advantage by attacking during moonless nights. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Dancing Lights\|Dancing Lights]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Disguise Self\|Disguise Self]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Ghost Sound\|Ghost Sound]] (DC 12), [[3.5 Spell List#Invisibility\|Invisibility]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Pass Without Trace\|Pass Without Trace]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Tongues\|Tongues]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Water Breathing\|Water Breathing]] ;
 - * Caster level 9th. The save DC is Charisma-based.

#### Weakness (Su)
A green hag can weaken a foe by making a special touch attack. The opponent must succeed on a DC 16 Fortitude save or take 2d4 points of Strength damage. The save DC is Charisma-based. 

#### Mimicry (Ex)
A green hag can imitate the sounds of almost any animal found near its lair. 

#### Skills
A green hag has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line. 

### Sea Hag



|  | Medium Monstrous Humanoid (Aquatic) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 3d8+6 (19 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares), swim 40 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 14 (+1 Dex, +3 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +3/+7 | 
| Attack: | Claw +7 melee (1d4+4) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +7 melee (1d4+4) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Horrific appearance, evil eye | 
| Special Qualities: | Amphibious, spell resistance 14 | 
| Saves: | Fort +2, Ref +4, Will +4 | 
| Abilities: | Str 19, Dex 12, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 13, Cha 14 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Craft Or Knowledge\|Craft Or Knowledge]] (any One) +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +12; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Toughness\|Toughness]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate aquatic | 
| Organization: | Solitary or covey (3 hags of any kind plus 1--8 ogres and 1--4 evil giants) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 4 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually chaotic evil | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
The sea hag is found in the water of seas or overgrown lakes. 

A sea hag is about the same height and weight as a female human. 

#### Combat

Sea hags are not subtle and prefer a direct approach to combat. 

They usually remain in hiding until they can affect as many foes as possible with their horrific appearance. 

#### Horrific Appearance (Su)
The sight of a sea hag is so revolting that anyone (other than another hag) who sets eyes upon one must succeed on a DC 13 Fortitude save or instantly be weakened, taking 2d6 points of Strength damage. This damage cannot reduce a victim's Strength score below 0, but anyone reduced to Strength 0 is helpless. Creatures that are affected by this power or that successfully save against it cannot be affected again by the same hag's horrific appearance for 24 hours. The save DC is Charisma-based. 

#### Evil Eye (Su)
Three times per day, a sea hag can cast its dire gaze upon any single creature within 30 feet. The target must succeed on a DC 13 Will save or be dazed for three days, although *remove curse* or *dispel evil* can restore sanity sooner. In addition, an affected creature must succeed on a DC 13 Fortitude save or die from fright. Creatures with immunity to fear effects are not affected by the sea hag's evil eye. The save DCs are Charisma-based. 

#### Amphibious (Ex)
Although sea hags are aquatic, they can survive indefinitely on land. 

#### Skills
A sea hag has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line. 

### Hag Covey

From time to time, a trio of hags gathers as a covey. Usually this foul triune includes one hag of each type, but this is not always the case. 

#### Combat

Hags in a covey rely on deception and their boosted magical abilities in combat. 

A covey of hags is 80% likely to be guarded by 1d8 ogres and 1d4 evil giants who do their bidding. These minions are often disguised with a *veil* spell to appear less threatening and sent forth as spies. Such minions often (60%) carry magic stones known as *hag eyes* (see below). 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **3/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Animate Dead\|Animate Dead]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Bestow Curse\|Bestow Curse]] (DC 17), [[3.5 Spell List#Control Weather\|Control Weather]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Dream\|Dream]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Forcecage\|Forcecage]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Mind Blank\|Mind Blank]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Mirage Arcana\|Mirage Arcana]] (DC 18), [[3.5 Spell List#Polymorph\|Polymorph]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Veil\|Veil]] (DC 19), [[3.5 Spell List#Vision\|Vision]] ;
 - * Caster level 9th. The save DCs are based on a Charisma score of 16. To use one of these abilities (which requires a full-round action), all three hags must be within 10 feet of one another, and all must participate. Once per month, a covey that does not have a *hag eye* can create one from a gem worth at least 20 gp (see below).

#### Hag Eye

A *hag eye* is a magic gem created by a covey. It appears to be nothing more than a semiprecious stone, but a *gem of seeing* or other such effect reveals it as a disembodied eye. Often, a *hag eye* is worn as a ring, brooch, or other adornment. Any of the three hags who created the *hag eye* can see through it whenever they wish, so long as it is on the same plane of existence as the hag. A *hag eye* has hardness 5 and 10 hit points. Destroying a *hag eye* deals 1d10 points of damage to each member of the covey and causes the one who sustained the greatest damage to be blinded for 24 hours. 

## Half-Celestial

No matter the form, half-celestials are always comely and delightful to the senses, having golden skin, sparkling eyes, angelic wings, or some other sign of their higher nature. 

### Creating a Half-Celestial

"Half-celestial" is an inherited template that can be added to any living, corporeal creature with an Intelligence score of 4 or higher and nonevil alignment (referred to hereafter as the base creature). 

A half-celestial uses all the base creature's statistics and special abilities except as noted here. 

#### Size and Type
The creature's type changes to outsider. Do not recalculate the creature's Hit Dice, base attack bonus, or saves. Size is unchanged. Half-celestials are normally native outsiders. 

#### Speed
A half-celestial has feathered wings and can fly at twice the base creature's base land speed (good maneuverability). If the base creature has a fly speed, use that instead. 

#### Armor Class
Natural armor improves by +1 (this stacks with any natural armor bonus the base creature has). 

#### Special Attacks
A half-celestial retains all the special attacks of the base creature and also gains the following special abilities. 

*Daylight (Su):* Half-celestials can use a *daylight* effect (as the spell) at will. 

*Smite Evil (Su):* Once per day a half-celestial can make a normal melee attack to deal extra damage equal to its HD (maximum of +20) against an evil foe. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
A half-celestial with an Intelligence or Wisdom score of 8 or higher has two or more spell-like abilities, depending on its Hit Dice, as indicated on the table below. The abilities are cumulative Unless otherwise noted, an ability is usable once per day. Caster level equals the creature's HD, and the save DC is Charisma-based. |HD|Abilities| |---|---| |1-2|Protection from evil 3/day, bless| |3-4|Aid, detect evil| |5-6|Cure serious wounds, neutralize poison| |7-8|Holy smite, remove disease| |9-10|Dispel evil| |11-12|Holy word| |13-14|Holy aura 3/day, hallow| |15-16|Mass charm monster| |17-18|Summon monster IX (celestials only)| |19-20|Resurrection|
#### Special Qualities
A half-celestial has all the special qualities of the base creature, plus the following special qualities. 

- Darkvision out to 60 feet.

- Immunity to disease.

- Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10.

- Damage reduction: 5/magic (if HD 11 or less) or 10/magic (if HD 12 or
more). 

- A half-celestial's natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for
the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

- Spell resistance equal to creature's HD + 10 (maximum 35).

-  +4 racial bonus on Fortitude saves against poison.

#### Abilities
Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +4, Dex +2, Con +4, Int +2, Wis +4, Cha +4. 

#### Skills
A half-celestial gains skill points as an outsider and has skill points equal to (8 + Int modifier) x (HD +3). Do not include Hit Dice from class levels in this calculation---the half-celestial gains outsider skill points only for its racial Hit Dice, and gains the normal amount of skill points for its class levels. Treat skills from the base creature's list as class skills, and other skills as cross-class. 

#### Challenge Rating
HD 5 or less, as base creature +1; HD 6 to 10, as base creature +2; HD 11 or more, as base creature +3. 

#### Alignment
Always good (any). 

#### Level Adjustment
Same as base creature +4. 

## Half-Dragon

Half-dragon creatures are always more formidable than others of their kind that do not have dragon blood, and their appearance betrays their nature---scales, elongated features, reptilian eyes, and exaggerated teeth and claws. Sometimes they have wings. 

#### Creating a Half-Dragon

"Half-dragon" is an inherited template that can be added to any living, corporeal creature (referred to hereafter as the base creature). 

A half-dragon uses all the base creature's statistics and special abilities except as noted here. 

#### Size and Type
The creature's type changes to dragon. Size is unchanged. Do not recalculate base attack bonus or saves. 

#### Hit Dice
Increase base creature's racial HD by one die size, to a maximum of d12. Do not increase class HD. 

#### Speed
A half-dragon that is Large or larger has wings and can fly at twice its base land speed (maximum 120 ft.) with average maneuverability. A half-dragon that is Medium or smaller does not have wings. 

#### Armor Class
Natural armor improves by +4. 

#### Attack
A half-dragon has two claw attacks and a bite attack, and the claws are the primary natural weapon. If the base creature can use weapons, the half-dragon retains this ability. A half-dragon fighting without weapons uses a claw when making an attack action. When it has a weapon, it usually uses the weapon instead. 

#### Full Attack
A half-dragon fighting without weapons uses both claws and its bite when making a full attack. If armed with a weapon, it usually uses the weapon as its primary attack and its bite as a natural secondary attack. If it has a hand free, it uses a claw as an additional natural secondary attack. 

#### Damage
Half-dragons have bite and claw attacks. If the base creature does not have these attack forms, use the damage values in the table below. Otherwise, use the values below or the base creature's damage values, whichever are greater. 

|Size|Bite Damage|Claw Damage|
|---|---|---|
|Fine|1|-|
|Diminutive|1d2|1|
|Tiny|1d3|1d2|
|Small|1d4|1d3|
|Medium|1d6|1d4|
|Large|1d8|1d6|
|Huge|2d6|1d8|
|Gargantuan|3d6|2d6|
|Colossal|4d6|3d6|

### Special Attacks
A half-dragon retains all the special attacks of the base creature and gains a breath weapon based on the dragon variety (see the table below), usable once per day. A half-dragon's breath weapon deals 6d8 points of damage. A successful Reflex save (DC 10 + 1/2 half-dragon's racial HD + half-dragon's Con modifier) reduces damage by half. 

|Dragon Variety|Breath Weapon|
|---|---|
|Black|60-foot line of acid|
|Blue|60-foot ine of lightning|
|Green|30-foot cone of corrosive (acid) gas|
|Red|30-foot cone of fire|
|White|30-foot cone of cold|
|Brass|60-foot line of fire|
|Bronze|60-foot line of lightning|
|Copper|60-foot line of acid|
|Gold|30-foot cone of fire|
|Silver|30-foot cone of cold|

#### Special Qualities
A half-dragon has all the special qualities of the base creature, plus darkvision out to 60 feet and low-light vision. A half-dragon has immunity to *sleep* and paralysis effects, and an additional immunity based on its dragon variety. 

|Dragon Variety|Immunity|Dragon Variety|Immunity|
|---|---|---|---|
|Black|Acid|Brass|Fire|
|Blue|Electricity|Bronze|Electricity|
|Green|Acid|Copper|Acid|
|Red|Fire|Gold|Fire|
|White|Cold|Silver|Cold|

#### Abilities
Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +8, Con +2, Int +2, Cha +2. 

#### Skills
A half-dragon gains skill points as a dragon and has skill points equal to (6 + Int modifier) x (HD + 3). Do not include Hit Dice from class levels in this calculation---the half-dragon gains dragon skill points only for its racial Hit Dice, and gains the normal amount of skill points for its class levels. Treat skills from the base creature's list as class skills, and other skills as cross-class. 

#### Environment
Same as either the base creature or the dragon variety. 

#### Challenge Rating
Same as the base creature + 2 (minimum 3). 

#### Alignment
Same as the dragon variety. 

#### Level Adjustment
Same as base creature +3. 

## Half-Fiend

No matter its form, a half-fiend is always hideous to behold, having dark scales, horns, glowing red eyes, bat wings, a fetid odor, or some other obvious sign that it is tainted with evil. 

#### Creating a Half-Fiend

"Half-fiend" is an inherited template that can be added to any living, corporeal creature with an Intelligence score of 4 or more and nongood alignment (referred to hereafter as the base creature). 

A half-fiend uses all the base creature's statistics and special abilities except as noted here. 

#### Size and Type
The creature's type changes to outsider. Do not recalculate Hit Dice, base attack bonus, or saves. Size is unchanged. Half-fiends are normally native outsiders. 

#### Speed
A half-fiend has bat wings. Unless the base creature has a better fly speed, the creature can fly at the base creature's base land speed (average maneuverability). 

#### Armor Class
Natural armor improves by +1 (this stacks with any natural armor bonus the base creature has). 

#### Attack
A half-fiend has two claw attacks and a bite attack, and the claws are the primary natural weapon. If the base creature can use weapons, the half-fiend retains this ability. A half-fiend fighting without weapons uses a claw when making an attack action. When it has a weapon, it usually uses the weapon instead. 

#### Full Attack
A half-fiend fighting without weapons uses both claws and its bite when making a full attack. If armed with a weapon, it usually uses the weapon as its primary attack and its bite as a natural secondary attack. If it has a hand free, it uses a claw as an additional natural secondary attack. 

#### Damage
Half-fiends have bite and claw attacks. If the base creature does not have these attack forms, use the damage values in the table below. Otherwise, use the values below or the base creature's damage values, whichever are greater. 

|Size|Bite Damage|Claw Damage|
|---|---|---|
|Fine|1|-|
|Diminutive|1d2|1|
|Tiny|1d3|1d2|
|Small|1d4|1d3|
|Medium|1d6|1d4|
|Large|1d8|1d6|
|Huge|2d6|1d8|
|Gargantuan|3d6|2d6|
|Colossal|4d6|3d6|

### Special Attacks
A half-fiend retains all the special attacks of the base creature and gains the following special attack. 

*Smite Good (Su):* Once per day the creature can make a normal melee attack to deal extra damage equal to its HD (maximum of +20) against a good foe. 

Spell-Like Abilities: A half-fiend with an Intelligence or Wisdom score of 8 or higher has spell-like abilities depending on its Hit Dice, as indicated on the table below. The abilities are cumulative. Unless otherwise noted, an ability is usable once per day. Caster level equals the creature's HD, and the save DC is Charisma-based. 

|HD|Abilities|
|---|---|
|1-2|Darkness 3/day|
|3-4|Desecrate|
|5-6|Unholy blight|
|7-8|Poison 3/day|
|9-10|Contagion|
|11-12|Blasphemy|
|13-14|Unholy aura 3/day, unhallow|
|15-16|Horrid wilting|
|17-18|Summon monster IX (fiends only)|
|19-20|Destruction|

#### Special Qualities
A half-fiend has all the special qualities of the base creature, plus the following special qualities. 

- Darkvision out to 60 feet.

- Immunity to poison.

- Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, electricity 10, and fire 10.

- Damage reduction: 5/magic (if HD 11 or less) or 10/magic (if HD 12 or
more). 

- A half-fiend's natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for the
purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

- Spell resistance equal to creature's HD + 10 (maximum 35).

#### Abilities
Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +4, Dex +4, Con +2, Int +4, Cha +2. 

#### Skills
A half-fiend gains skill points as an outsider and has skill points equal to (8 + Int modifier) x (HD + 3). Do not include Hit Dice from class levels in this calculation---the half-fiend gains outsider skill points only for its racial Hit Dice, and gains the normal amount of skill points for its class levels. Treat skills from the base creature's list as class skills, and other skills as cross-class. 

#### Challenge Rating
HD 4 or less, as base creature +1; HD 5 to 10, as base creature +2; HD 11 or more, as base creature +3. 

#### Alignment
Always evil (any). 

#### Level Adjustment
+4. 

## Halfling

|   | Halfling, 1st-Level Warrior       |
|---|---|
|                                   | Small Humanoid (Halfling)         |
| Hit Dice:                         | 1d8+1 (5 hp)                      |
| Initiative:                       | +1                                |
| Speed:                            | 20 ft. (4 squares)                |
| Armor Class:                      | 16 (+1 size, +1 Dex, +3 studded leather, +1 light shield), touch 12, flat-footed 15 |
| Base Attack/Grapple:              | +1/--3                            |
| Attack:                           | Longsword +3 melee (1d6/19--20)or light crossbow +3 ranged (1d6/19--20) |
| Full Attack:                      | Longsword +3 melee (1d6/19--20) or light crossbow +3 ranged (1d6/19--20) |
| Space/Reach:                      | 5 ft./5 ft.                       |
| Special Attacks:                  | Halfling traits                   |
| Special Qualities:                | Halfling traits                   |
| Saves:                            | Fort +4, Ref +2, Will +0          |
| Abilities:                        | Str 11, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8 |
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump --4\|Jump --4]] , [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +1; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (longsword); | 
| Environment:                      | Warm plains, (Deep halfling: Warm hills),(Tallfellow: Temperate forests)|
| Organization:                     | Company (2--4), squad (11--20 plus 2 3rd-level sergeants and 1 leader of 3rd--6th level), or band (30--100 plus 100%  noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults, 5 5th-level lieutenants, 3 7th-level captains, 6--10 dogs, and 2--5 riding dogs) |
| Challenge Rating:                 | 1/2                               |
| Treasure:                         | Standard                          |
| Alignment:                        | Usually neutral                   |
| Advancement:                      | By character class                |
| Level Adjustment:                 | +0                                |

Halflings stand about 3 feet tall and usually weigh between 30 and 35 pounds. They have brown or black eyes. Halfling men often have long sideburns, but beards are rare among them and mustaches almost unseen. Halflings prefer simple, comfortable, and practical clothes. Unlike members of most races, they prefer actual comfort to shows of wealth. Halflings reach adulthood in their early twenties and generally live into the middle of their second century. Halflings speak Halfling and Common. 

Most halflings encountered outside their home are warriors; the information in the statistics block is for one of 1st level. 

#### Combat

Halflings prefer to fight defensively, usually hiding and launching ranged attacks as the foe approaches. Their tactics are very much like those of elves but place more emphasis on cover and concealment and less on mobility. 

#### Halfling Traits (Ex)
Halflings possess the following racial traits. 

-  +2 Dexterity, --2 Strength.

- Small size. +1 bonus to Armor Class, +1 bonus on attack rolls, +4
bonus on Hide checks, --4 penalty on grapple checks, lifting and carrying limits 3/4 those of Medium characters. 

- A halfling's base land speed is 20 feet.

-  +2 racial bonus on Climb, Jump, and Move Silently checks.

-  +1 racial bonus on all saving throws.

-  +2 morale bonus on saving throws against fear. This bonus stacks
with the halfling's +1 bonus on saving throws in general. 

-  +1 racial bonus on attack rolls with thrown weapons and slings.

-  +2 racial bonus on Listen checks.

- Automatic Languages: Common, Halfling. Bonus Languages: Dwarven,
Elven, Gnome, Goblin, Orc. 

- Favored Class: Rogue.

The halfling warrior presented here had the following ability scores before racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Subraces

The information above is for the lightfoot halfling, the most common halfling variety. There are two other major halfling subraces, which differ from lightfoot halflings as follows. 

### Tallfellow

Tallfellows are somewhat rare among halfling folk. Tallfellows are 4 feet tall or more and weigh between 30 and 35 pounds. They generally speak Elven in addition to Common and Halfling. 

#### Tallfellow Traits (Ex)
These traits are in addition to the lightfoot halfling traits, except where noted. 

-  +2 racial bonus on Search, Spot, and Listen checks. Like an elf, a
tallfellow who merely passes within 5 feet of a secret or concealed door is entitled to a Search check as though actively looking for it. This trait replaces the lightfoot's +2 bonus on Listen checks. 

- Tallfellows are less athletic than lightfoot halflings and do not
have a racial bonus on Climb, Jump, and Move Silently checks. 

### Deep Halfling

These halflings are shorter and stockier than the more common lightfeet. 

Deep halflings are about 2-1/2 tall and weigh between 30 and 35 pounds. Deep halflings speak Dwarven fluently. 

#### Deep Halfling Traits (Ex)
These traits are in addition to the lightfoot halfling traits, except where noted. 

- Darkvision out to 60 feet.

- Stonecunning: Like dwarves, deep halflings have a +2 racial bonus on
checks to notice unusual stonework. Something that isn't stone but that is disguised as stone also counts as unusual stonework. A deep halfling who merely comes within 10 feet of unusual stonework can make a check as though actively searching and can use the Search skill to find stonework traps as a rogue can. A deep halfling can also intuit depth, sensing the approximate distance underground as naturally as a human can sense which way is up. 

-  +2 racial bonus on Appraise checks and Craft checks that are related
to stone or metal. 

- Deep halflings are less athletic than lightfoot halflings and do not
have a racial bonus on Climb, Jump, and Move Silently checks. 

## Harpy

| |Harpy Medium Monstrous Humanoid| |Harpy Archer, 7th-Level Fighter Medium Monstrous Humanoid|
|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|7d8 (31 hp)||7d8 + 7d10 + 28 (103 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+2||+9|
|**Speed:**|20 ft. (4 squares), fly 80 ft. (average)||20 ft. (4 squares), fly 80 ft. (average)|
|**Armor Class:**|13 (+2 Dex, +1 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 11||23 (+5 Dex, +1 natural, +6 +3 studded leather, +1 ring of protection +1), touch 16, flat-footed 18|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+7/+7||+14/+15|
|**Attack:**|Club +7 melee (1d6)||+1 frost composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) +22 ranged (1d8+4/19-20/�3 plus 1d6 cold) or claw +15 melee (1d3+1)|
|**Full Attack:**|Club +7/+2 melee (1d6) and 2 claws +2 melee (1d3)||+1 frost composite longbow (+1 Str bonus) +22/+17/+12 ranged (1d8+4/19-20/�3 plus 1d6 cold) or 2 claws +15 melee (1d3+1)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||5 ft./5 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|Captivating song||Captivating song|
|**Special Qualities:**|Darkvision 60 ft.||Darkvision 60 ft.|
|**Saves:**|Fort +2, Ref +7, Will +6||Fort +11, Ref +14, Will +11|
|**Abilities:**|Str 10, Dex 15, Con 10, Int 7, Wis 12, Cha 17||Str 12, Dex 20, Con 14, Int 6, Wis 11, Cha 19|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Bluff\|Bluff]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Perform\|Perform]] (oratory) +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +3; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Bluff\|Bluff]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Perform\|Perform]] (oratory) +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +5; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Dodge\|Dodge]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Flyby Attack\|Flyby Attack]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Persuasive\|Persuasive]] ; | | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Critical\|Improved Critical]] (composite Longbow), [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Iron Will\|Iron Will]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Manyshot\|Manyshot]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Point Blank Shot\|Point Blank Shot]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Rapid Shot\|Rapid Shot]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (composite Longbow), [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Specialization\|Weapon Specialization]] (composite Longbow); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate marshes||Temperate marshes|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, or flight (7-12)||Solitary|
|**Challenge Rating:**|4||11|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard (including equipment)|
|**Alignment:**|Usually chaotic evil||Usually chaotic evil|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3||+3|

Harpies like to entrance hapless travelers with their magical songs and lead them to unspeakable torments. Only when a harpy has finished playing with its new "toys" will it release them from suffering by killing and consuming them. 

#### Combat

When a harpy engages in battle, it prefers to use Flyby Attack and strike with a melee weapon. 

#### Captivating Song (Su)
The most insidious ability of the harpy is its song. When a harpy sings, all creatures (other than harpies) within a 300-foot spread must succeed on a DC 16 Will save or become captivated. This is a sonic mind-affecting charm effect. A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same harpy's song for 24 hours. The save DC is Charisma-based. 

A captivated victim walks toward the harpy, taking the most direct route available. If the path leads into a dangerous area (through flame, off a cliff, or the like), that creature gets a second saving throw. Captivated creatures can take no actions other than to defend themselves. (Thus, a fighter cannot run away or attack but takes no defensive penalties.) A victim within 5 feet of the harpy stands there and offers no resistance to the monster's attacks. The effect continues for as long as the harpy sings and for 1 round thereafter. A bard's countersong ability allows the captivated creature to attempt a new Will save. 

#### Skills
Harpies have a +4 racial bonus on Bluff and Listen checks. 

### Harpy Archer

A cruel hunter and roaming brigand, the harpy archer has trained as a fighter specializing in ranged combat. Harpy archers often become mercenaries, selling their services to the highest bidder. When not employed, they make ends meet as highway robbers, forcing merchant caravans to pay protection money. 

#### Combat

#### Captivating Song (Su)
Will DC 17 negates. 

*Possessions: +3 studded leather, +1 frost composite longbow* (+1 Str bonus), 10 cold iron arrows, 10 silvered arrows, 5 *+2 arrows, lesser bracers of archery, potion of cure moderate wounds, potion of cat's grace, cloak of resistance +2, ring of protection +1.* (Different harpy archers may have different possessions.) 

## Hell Hound

| |Hellhound Medium Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Fire, Lawful)| |Nessian Warhound Large Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar, Fire, Lawful)|
|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|4d8+4 (22 hp)||12d8+60 (114 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+5||+6|
|**Speed:**|40 ft. (8 squares)||40 ft. (8 squares)|
|**Armor Class:**|16 (+1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 15||24 (-1 size, +2 Dex, +7 natural, +6 +2 chain shirt barding), touch 11, flat-footed 22|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+4/+5||+12/+24|
|**Attack:**|Bite +5 melee (1d8+1 plus 1d6 fire)||Bite +20 melee (2d6+12/19-20 plus 1d8 fire)|
|**Full Attack:**|Bite +5 melee (1d8+1 plus 1d6 fire)||Bite +20 melee (2d6+12/19-20 plus 1d8 fire)|
|**Space/Reach:**|5 ft./5 ft.||10 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|Breath weapon, fiery bite||Breath weapon, fiery bite|
|**Special Qualities:**|Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, scent, vulnerability to cold||Darkvision 60 ft., immunity to fire, scent, vulnerability to cold|
|**Saves:**|Fort +5, Ref +5, Will +4||Fort +13, Ref +10, Will +9|
|**Abilities:**|Str 13, Dex 13, Con 13, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 6||Str 26, Dex 14, Con 20, Int 4, Wis 12, Cha 6|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +7*; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +19, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +18, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +21, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +18, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +8*, [[3.5 Skill List#Tumble\|Tumble]] +3; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#improved-initiative">Improved Initiative\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#improved-initiative">Improved Initiative]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#run">Run\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#run">Run]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#track">Track\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#track">Track]] <sup>B</sup></a>; | | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Critical\|Improved Critical]] (bite), [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Track\|Track]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (bite); | 
|**Environment:**|A lawful evil plane||A lawful evil plane|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, or pack (5-12)||Solitary, pair, or pack (1-2 Nessian warhounds and 5-12 hell hounds)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|3||9|
|**Treasure:**|None||+2 chain shirt barding|
|**Alignment:**|Always lawful evil||Always lawful evil|
|**Advancement:**|5-8 HD (Medium); 9-12 HD (Large)||13-17 HD (Large); 18-24 HD (Huge)|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+3 (cohort)||+4 (cohort|

A typical hell hound stands 4-1/2 feet high at the shoulder and weighs 120 pounds. 

Hell hounds do not speak but understand Infernal. 

#### Combat

Hell hounds are efficient hunters. A favorite pack tactic is to surround prey quietly, then attack with one or two hounds, driving it toward the rest with their fiery breath. If the prey doesn't run, the pack closes in. Hell hounds track fleeing prey relentlessly. 

A hell hound's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as evil-aligned 

and lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Breath Weapon (Su)
10-foot cone, once every 2d4 rounds, damage 2d6 fire, Reflex DC 13 half. The save DC is Constitution-based. 

#### Fiery Bite (Su)
A hell hound deals an extra 1d6 points of fire damage every time it bites an opponent, as if its bite were a flaming weapon. 

#### Skills
Hell hounds have a +5 racial bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. 

\*They also receive a +8 racial bonus on Survival checks when tracking by scent, due to their keen sense of smell. 

### Nessian Warhound

Nessian warhounds are coalblack mastiffs the size of draft horses, often fitted with shirts of infernal chainmail. 

Nessian warhounds resemble hell hounds, except as otherwise noted. 

#### Breath Weapon (Su)
10-foot cone, once every 2d4 rounds, damage 3d6 fire, Reflex DC 21 half. The save DC is Constitution- based. 

### #Fiery Bite (Su)
A Nessian warhound deals an extra 1d8 points of fire d a m a g e every time it bites an opponent, as if its bite were a flaming weapon. 

## Hippogriff



|  | Large Magical Beast | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 3d10+9 (25 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +2 | 
| Speed: | 50 ft. (10 squares), fly 100 ft. (average) | 
| Armor Class: | 15 (--1 size, +2 Dex, +4 natural), touch 11, flat-footed 13 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +3/+11 | 
| Attack: | Claw +6 melee (1d4+4) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +6 melee (1d4+4) and bite +1 melee (1d8+2) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, scent | 
| Saves: | Fort +6, Ref +5, Will +2 | 
| Abilities: | Str 18, Dex 15, Con 16, Int 2, Wis 13, Cha 8 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +8; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Dodge\|Dodge]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats List#Wingover\|Wingover]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate hills | 
| Organization: | Solitary, pair, or flight (7--12) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 2 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral | 
| Advancement: | 4--6 HD (Large); 7--9 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
Hippogriffs are aggressive flying creatures that combine features of horses and giant eagles. Voracious omnivores, hippogriffs will hunt humanoids as readily as any other meal. A typical hippogriff is 9 feet long, has a wingspan of 20 feet, and weighs 1,000 pounds. 

#### Combat

Hippogriffs dive at their prey and strike with their clawed forelegs. When they cannot dive, they slash with claws and beak. Mated pairs and flights of these creatures attack in concert, diving repeatedly to drive away or kill intruders. Hippogriffs fight to the death to defend their nests and their hatchlings, which are prized as aerial mounts and fetch a handsome price in many civilized areas. 

#### Skills
Hippogriffs have a +4 racial bonus on Spot checks. 

### Training a Hippogriff

A hippogriff requires training before it can bear a rider in combat. 

Training a hippogriff requires six weeks of work and a DC 25 Handle Animal check. Riding a hippogriff requires an exotic saddle. A hippogriff can fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds on a Ride check. 

Hippogriff eggs are worth 2,000 gp apiece on the open market, while young are worth 3,000 gp each. Professional trainers charge 1,000 gp to rear or train a hippogriff. 

#### Carrying Capacity
A light load for a hippogriff is up to 300 pounds; a medium load, 301--600 pounds; and a heavy load, 601--900 pounds. 

## Hobgoblin



|  | Hobgoblin, 1st-Level Warrior | 
|---|---|
|  | Medium Humanoid (Goblinoid) | 
| Hit Dice: | 1d8+2 (6 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 15 (+1 Dex, +3 studded leather, +1 light shield), touch 11, flat-footed 14 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +1/+2 | 
| Attack: | Longsword +2 melee (1d8+1/19--20) or javelin +2 ranged (1d6+1) | 
| Full Attack: | Longsword +2 melee (1d8+1/19--20) or javelin +2 ranged (1d6+1) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft. | 
| Saves: | Fort +4, Ref +1, Will --1 | 
| Abilities: | Str 13, Dex 13, Con 14, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +2; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] ; | 
| Environment: | Warm hills | 
| Organization: | Gang (4--9), band (10--100 plus 50% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults and 1 leader of 4th--6th level), warband (10--24), or tribe (30--300 plus 50% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 20 adults, 1 or 2 lieutenants of 4th or 5th level, 1 leader of 6th--8th level, 2--4 dire wolves, and 1--4 ogres or 1--2 trolls) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 1/2 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually lawful evil | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | +1 | 
Hobgoblins are larger cousins of goblins. Hobgoblins' hair color ranges from dark reddish-brown to dark gray. They have dark orange or red-orange skin. Large males have blue or red noses. Hobgoblins' eyes are yellowish or dark brown, while their teeth are yellow. Their garments tend to be brightly colored, often blood red with black-tinted leather. Their weaponry is kept polished and in good repair. Hobgoblins speak Goblin and Common. Most hobgoblins encountered outside their homes are warriors; the information in the statistics block is for one of 1st level. 

#### Combat

These creatures have a strong grasp of strategy and tactics and are capable of carrying out sophisticated battle plans. Under the leadership of a skilled strategist or tactician, their discipline can prove a deciding factor. Hobgoblins hate elves and attack them first, in preference to other opponents. 

#### Skills
Hobgoblins have a +4 racial bonus on Move Silently checks. 

The hobgoblin warrior presented here had the following ability scores before racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

#### Hobgoblin Characters

Hobgoblin characters possess the following racial traits. 

-  +2 Dexterity, +2 Constitution.

- A hobgoblin's base land speed is 30 feet.

- Darkvision out to 60 feet.

-  +4 racial bonus on Move Silently checks.

- Automatic Languages: Common, Goblin. Bonus Languages: Draconic,
Dwarven, Infernal, Giant, Orc. 

- Favored Class: Fighter.

- Level adjustment +1.

## Homunculus



|  | Tiny Construct | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 2d10 (11 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +2 | 
| Speed: | 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (good) | 
| Armor Class: | 14 (+2 Dex, +2 size), touch 14, flat-footed 12 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +1/--8 | 
| Attack: | Bite +2 melee (1d4--1 plus poison) | 
| Full Attack: | Bite +2 melee (1d4--1 plus poison) | 
| Space/Reach: | 2-1/2 ft./0 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Poison | 
| Special Qualities: | Construct traits, darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision | 
| Saves: | Fort +0, Ref +4, Will +1 | 
| Abilities: | Str 8, Dex 15, Con ---, Int 10, Wis 12, Cha 7 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +14, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +4; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Lightning Reflexes\|Lightning Reflexes]] ; | 
| Environment: | Any | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 1 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Any (same as creator) | 
| Advancement: | 3--6 HD (Tiny) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
A homunculus is a miniature servant created by a wizard. These creatures are weak combatants but make effective spies, messengers, and scouts. A homunculus's creator determines its precise features. Homunculi are little more than tools designed to carry out assigned tasks. They are extensions of their creators, sharing the same alignment and basic nature. A homunculus cannot speak, but the process of creating one links it telepathically with its creator. 

It knows what its master knows and can convey to him or her everything it sees and hears, out to a distance of 1,500 feet. A homunculus never travels beyond this range willingly, though it can be removed forcibly. If this occurs, the creature does everything in its power to regain contact with its master. An attack that destroys a homunculus deals 2d10 points of damage to its master. 

If the creature's master is slain, the homunculus also dies, and its body swiftly melts away into a pool of ichor. 

#### Combat

Homunculi land on their victims and bite with their venomous fangs. 

#### Poison (Ex)
Injury, Fortitude DC 13, initial damage sleep for 1 minute, secondary damage sleep for another 5d6 minutes. The save DC is Constitution-based and includes a +2 racial bonus. 

#### Construction

A homunculus is shaped from a mixture of clay, ashes, mandrake root, spring water, and one pint of the creator's own blood. The materials cost 50 gp. The creature's master may assemble the body or hire someone else to do the job. Creating the body requires a DC 12 Craft (sculpting) check or a DC 12 Craft (pottery) check. 

After the body is sculpted, it is animated through an extended magical ritual that requires a specially prepared laboratory or workroom, similar to an alchemist's laboratory and costing 500 gp to establish. If the creator is personally constructing the creature's body, the building and ritual can be performed together. 

A homunculus with more than 2 Hit Dice can be created, but each additional Hit Die adds +2,000 gp to the cost to create. 

Craft Construct, *arcane eye, mirror image, mending,* caster must be at least 4th level; Price --- (never sold); Cost 1,050 gp + 78 XP. 

## Howler



|  | Large Outsider (Chaotic, Evil, Extraplanar) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 6d8+12 (39 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +7 | 
| Speed: | 60 ft. (12 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 17 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +5 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 14 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +6/+15 | 
| Attack: | Bite +10 melee (2d8+5) | 
| Full Attack: | Bite +10 melee (2d8+5) and 1d4 quills +5 melee (1d6+2) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Quills, howl | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft. | 
| Saves: | Fort +7, Ref +8, Will +7 | 
| Abilities: | Str 21, Dex 17, Con 15, Int 6, Wis 14, Cha 8 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +14, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +12, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Survival\|Survival]] +2 (+4 Following Tracks); | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Reflexes\|Combat Reflexes]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] ; | 
| Environment: | A chaotic-aligned plane | 
| Organization: | Solitary, gang (2--4), or pack (6--10) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 3 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always chaotic evil | 
| Advancement: | 7--9 HD (Large); 11--18 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | +3 (cohort) | 
Howlers live on planes where chaos and evil hold sway. A howler is about 8 feet long and weighs about 2,000 pounds. Although they are surprisingly intelligent, howlers do not speak---they only howl. If there is a language within the howls, as some have suggested, even spells cannot decipher it. Howlers understand Abyssal. 

#### Combat

Howlers attack in groups, for they are cowardly and cruel. They prefer to charge into combat, race out, and then charge in again. A howler's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as chaotic-aligned and evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

#### Quills (Ex)
A howler's neck bristles with long quills. While biting, the creature thrashes about, striking with 1d4 of them. An opponent hit by a howler's quill attack must succeed on a DC 16 Reflex save or have the quill break off in his or her flesh. Lodged quills impose a --1 penalty on attacks, saves, and checks per quill. The save DC is Dexterity-based. 

A quill can be removed safely with a DC 20 Heal check; otherwise, removing a quill deals an extra 1d6 points of damage. 

#### Howl (Ex)
All beings other than outsiders that hear the creature's howling for an hour or longer are subject to its effect, though it does not help the howler in combat. Anyone within hearing range of a howler for a full hour must succeed on a DC 12 Will save or take 1 point of Wisdom damage. The save DC is Charisma-based. The save must be repeated for each hour of exposure. This is a sonic mind-affecting effect. 

#### Training a Howler

Although intelligent, a howler requires training before it can bear a rider in combat. To be trained, a howler must have a friendly attitude toward the trainer (this can be achieved through a successful Diplomacy check). Training a friendly howler requires six weeks of work and a DC 25 Handle Animal check. Riding a howler requires an exotic saddle. A howler can fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds on a Ride check. 

#### Carrying Capacity
A light load for a howler is up to 460 pounds; a medium load, 461--920 pounds; and a heavy load, 921--1,380 pounds. A howler can drag 6,900 pounds. 

## Hydra

| |Five-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast| |Six-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast| |Seven-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|5d10+28 (55 hp)||6d10+33 (66 hp)||7d10+38 (77 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+1||+1||+1|
|**Speed:**|20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.||20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.||20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.|
|**Armor Class:**|15 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +6 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 14||16 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +7 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 15||17 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +8 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 16|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+5/+16||+6/+17||+7/+19|
|**Attack:**|5 bites +6 melee (1d10+3)||6 bites +8 melee (1d10+3)||7 bites +10 melee (1d10+4)|
|**Full Attack:**|5 bites +6 melee (1d10+3)||6 bites +8 melee (1d10+3)||7 bites +10 melee (1d10+4)|
|**Space/Reach:**|15 ft./10 ft.||15 ft./10 ft.||15 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||-||-|
|**Special Qualities:**|Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 15, low-light vision, scent||Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 16, low-light vision, scent||Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 17, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +9, Ref +5, Will +3||Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +4||Fort +10, Ref +6, Will +4|
|**Abilities:**|Str 17, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9||Str 17, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9||Str 19, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +11; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +11; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +12; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>; | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus]] </a> (bite); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus]] </a> (bite); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)||Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)||Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)|
|**Organization:**|Solitary||Solitary||Solitary|
|**Challenge Rating:**|4 (normal); 6 (pyro- or cryo-)||5 (normal); 7 (pyro- or cryo-)||6 (normal); 8 (pyro- or cryo-)|
|**Treasure:**|1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items||1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items||1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items|
|**Alignment:**|Usually neutral||Usually neutral||Usually neutral|
|**Advancement:**|-||-||-|
|**Level Adjustment:**|-||-||-|

| |Eight-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast| |Nine-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast| |Ten-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|8d10+43 (87 hp)||9d10+48 (97 hp)||10d10+53 (108 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+1||+1||+1|
|**Speed:**|20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.||20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.||20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.|
|**Armor Class:**|18 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +9 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 17||19 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +10 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 18||20 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +11 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 19|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+8/+20||+9/+22||+10/+23|
|**Attack:**|8 bites +11 melee (1d10+4)||9 bites +13 melee (1d10+5)||10 bites +14 melee (1d10+5)|
|**Full Attack:**|8 bites +11 melee (1d10+4)||9 bites +13 melee (1d10+5)||10 bites +14 melee (1d10+5)|
|**Space/Reach:**|15 ft./10 ft.||15 ft./10 ft.||15 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||-||-|
|**Special Qualities:**|Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 18, low-light vision, scent||Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 19, low-light vision, scent||Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 20, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +11, Ref +7, Will +4||Fort +11, Ref +7, Will +5||Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +3|
|**Abilities:**|Str 19, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9||Str 21, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9||Str 21, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +7, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +12; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +13; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +13; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus]] </a> (bite); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#blind-fight">Blind-Fight\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#blind-fight">Blind-Fight]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus]] </a> (bite); | | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#blind-fight">Blind-Fight\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#blind-fight">Blind-Fight]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus]] </a> (bite); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)||Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)||Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)|
|**Organization:**|Solitary||Solitary||Solitary|
|**Challenge Rating:**|7 (normal); 9 (pyro- or cryo-)||8 (normal); 10 (pyro- or cryo-)||9 (normal); 11 (pyro- or cryo-)|
|**Treasure:**|1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items||1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items||1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items|
|**Alignment:**|Usually neutral||Usually neutral||Usually neutral|
|**Advancement:**|-||-||-|
|**Level Adjustment:**|-||-||-|

| |Eleven-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast| |Twelve-Headed Hydra Huge Magical Beast|
|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|11d10+58 (118 hp)||12d10+63 (129 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|+1||+1|
|**Speed:**|20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.||20 ft. (4 squares), swim 20 ft.|
|**Armor Class:**|21 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +12 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 20||22 (-2 size, +1 Dex, +13 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 21|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+11/+25||+12/+26|
|**Attack:**|11 bites +16 melee (1d10+6)||12 bites +17 melee (2d8+6)|
|**Full Attack:**|11 bites +16 melee (1d10+6)||12 bites +17 melee (2d8+6)|
|**Space/Reach:**|15 ft./10 ft.||15 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||-|
|**Special Qualities:**|Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 21, low-light vision, scent||Darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 22, low-light vision, scent|
|**Saves:**|Fort +12, Ref +8, Will +5||Fort +13, Ref +9, Will +6|
|**Abilities:**|Str 23, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9||Str 23, Dex 12, Con 20, Int 2, Wis 10, Cha 9|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +14; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Swim\|Swim]] +14; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#blind-fight">Blind-Fight\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#blind-fight">Blind-Fight]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#combat-reflexes">Combat Reflexes]] <sup>B</sup></a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#iron-will">Iron Will]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#toughness">Toughness]] </a>, [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] <a Style="color: Rgb(87, [[3.5 Feat List#158\|158]] , [[3.5 Feat List#182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus\|182)" Href="featsAll.html#weapon-focus">Weapon Focus]] </a> (bite); | | Feats: | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)||Temperate marshes (Pyro: Warm marshes) (Cyro: Cold marshes)|
|**Organization:**|Solitary||Solitary|
|**Challenge Rating:**|10 (normal); 12 (pyro- or cryo-)||11 (normal); 13 (pyro- or cryo-)|
|**Treasure:**|1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items||1/10 coins; 50% goods; 50% items|
|**Alignment:**|Usually neutral||Usually neutral|
|**Advancement:**|-||-|
|**Level Adjustment:**|-||-|

Hydras are reptile-like monsters with multiple heads. A hydra is gray-brown to dark brown, with a light yellow or tan underbelly. The eyes are amber and the teeth are yellow-white. It is about 20 feet long and weighs about 4,000 pounds. Hydras do not speak. 

#### Combat

Hydras can attack with all their heads at no penalty, even if they move or charge during the round. 

A hydra can be killed either by severing all its heads or by slaying its body. To sever a head, an opponent must make a successful sunder attempt with a slashing weapon. (The player should declare where the attack is aimed before making the attack roll.) Making a sunder attempt provokes an attack of opportunity unless the foe has the Improved Sunder feat. An opponent can strike at a hydra's heads from any position in which he could strike at the hydra itself, because the hydra's head writhe and whip about in combat. An opponent can ready an action to attempt to sunder a hydra's head when the creature bites at him. Each of a hydra's heads has hit points equal to the creature's full normal hit point total, divided by its original number of heads. Losing a head deals damage to the body equal to half the head's full normal hit points. A natural reflex seals the neck shut to prevent further blood loss. A hydra can no longer attack with a severed head but takes no other penalties. 

Each time a head is severed, two new heads spring from the stump in 1d4 rounds. A hydra can never have more than twice its original number of heads at any one time, and any extra heads it gains beyond its original number wither and die within a day. To prevent a severed head from growing back into two heads, at least 5 points of fire or acid damage must be dealt to the stump (a touch attack to hit) before the new heads appear. A flaming weapon (or similar effect) deals its energy damage to the stump in the same blow in which a head is severed. Fire or acid damage from an area effect may burn multiple stumps in addition to dealing damage to the hydra's body. A hydra does not die from losing its heads until all its heads have been cut off and the stumps seared by fire or acid. 

A hydra's body can be slain just like any other creature's, but hydras possess fast healing (see below) and are difficult to defeat in this fashion. Any attack that is not (or cannot be) an attempt to sunder a head affects the body. 

Targeted magical effects cannot sever a hydra's heads (and thus must be directed at the body) unless they deal slashing damage and could be used to make sunder attempts. 

#### Fast Healing (Ex)
Each round, a hydra heals damage equal to 10 + the number of its original heads. 

#### Skills
Hydras have a +2 racial bonus on Listen and Spot checks, thanks to their multiple heads. 

A hydra has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform some special action or avoid a hazard. It can always choose to take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. It can use the run action while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line. 

#### Feats
A hydra's Combat Reflexes feat allows it to use all its heads for attacks of opportunity. 

### Pyrohydra

Huge Magical Beast (Fire) 

These reddish hydras can breathe jets of fire 10 feet high, 10 feet wide, and 20 feet long. All heads breathe once every 1d4 rounds. Each jet deals 3d6 points of fire damage per head. A successful Reflex save halves the damage. The save DC is 10 + 1/2 hydra's original number of heads + hydra's Con modifier. 

Fire attacks cannot prevent a pyrohydra's stump from growing new heads (since a pyrohydra has immunity to fire), but 5 points of cold damage does. 

### Cryohydra

Huge Magical Beast (Cold) 

These purplish hydras can breathe jets of frost 10 feet high, 10 feet wide, and 20 feet long. All heads breathe once every 1d4 rounds. Each jet deals 3d6 points of cold damage per head. A successful Reflex save halves the damage. The save DC is 10 + 1/2 hydra's original number of heads + hydra's Con modifier. 

Cold attacks cannot prevent a cryohydra's stump from growing new heads (since a cryohydra has immunity to cold), but 5 points of fire damage does. 

**[[3.5 Monsters - I|Next: Monsters I.]]
