---
lang: en
title: 3.5 Compendium / Monsters / 3.5 Monsters - O
aliases: 3.5 Monsters - O
tags: 3-5e/rules/monsters
---

# MONSTERS O

**[[3.5 Monsters - N|Previous: Monsters N.]]

## Ogre

| |Ogre Large Giant| |Ogre, 4th-Level Barbarian Large Giant|
|---|---|---|---|
|**Hit Dice:**|4d8+11 (29 hp)||4d8+19 plus 4d12+16 (79 hp)|
|**Initiative:**|-1||+0|
|**Speed:**|30 ft. in hide armor (6 squares); base speed 40 ft.||40 ft. in hide armor (8 squares); base speed 50 ft.|
|**Armor Class:**|16 (-1 size, -1 Dex, +5 natural, +3 hide armor), touch 8, flat-footed 16||19 (-1 size, +5 natural, +4 +1 hide armor, ring of protection +1), touch 10, flat-footed 19|
|**Base Attack/Grapple:**|+3/+12||+7/+19|
|**Attack:**|Greatclub +8 melee (2d8+7) or javelin +1 ranged (1d8+5)||+1 greatclub +16 melee (2d8+13) or javelin +6 ranged (1d8+8)|
|**Full Attack:**|Greatclub +8 melee (2d8+7) or javelin +1 ranged (1d8+5)||+1 greatclub +16/+11 melee (2d8+13) or javelin +6 ranged (1d8+8)|
|**Space/Reach:**|10 ft./10 ft.||10 ft./10 ft.|
|**Special Attacks:**|-||Rage 2/day|
|**Special Qualities:**|Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision||Darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision, trap sense +1, uncanny dodge|
|**Saves:**|Fort +6, Ref +0, Will +1||Fort +12, Ref +2, Will +2|
|**Abilities:**|Str 21, Dex 8, Con 15, Int 6, Wis 10, Cha 7||Str 26, Dex 11, Con 18, Int 8, Wis 10, Cha 4|
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +2; | | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +13, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] -6, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +2; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Toughness\|Toughness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (greatclub); | | [[3.5 Feat List#Power Attack\|Power Attack]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Toughness\|Toughness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (greatclub); | 
|**Environment:**|Temperate hills (Merrow: Temperate aquatic)||Temperate hills|
|**Organization:**|Solitary, pair, gang (3-4), or band (5-8)||Solitary, pair, gang (1 plus 1-3 ogres), or band (1 plus 4-7 ogres)|
|**Challenge Rating:**|3||7|
|**Treasure:**|Standard||Standard (including +1 hide armor, +1 greatclub, and ring of protection +1)|
|**Alignment:**|Usually chaotic evil||Usually chaotic evil|
|**Advancement:**|By character class||By character class|
|**Level Adjustment:**|+2||+2|

Adult ogres stand 9 to 10 feet tall and weigh 600 to 650 pounds. Their skin color ranges from dull yellow to dull brown. Their clothing consists of poorly cured furs and hides, which add to their naturally repellent odor. 

Ogres speak Giant, and those specimens who boast Intelligence scores of at least 10 also speak Common. 

#### Combat

Ogres favor overwhelming odds, sneak attacks, and ambushes over a fair fight. They are intelligent enough to fire ranged weapons first to soften up their foes before closing, but ogre gangs and bands fight as unorganized individuals. 

### Ogre Barbarian

Their inherent bent toward chaos combines with their size and strength to make ogres natural barbarians. Indeed, their leaders are almost always barbarians of low to middle level, monstrous brutes whose fury in battle is truly fearsome. A raging ogre barbarian is an inspiration to other ogres. 

#### Combat

Marginally more intelligent than his brutish fellows, an ogre barbarian is slightly more likely to enter a fair fight, but in general prefers the brutish tactics common to all its kind. 

#### Rage (Ex)
Twice per day, an ogre barbarian can enter a state of fierce rage that last for 9 rounds. The following changes are in effect as long as he rages: AC 17 (touch 8, flat-footed 17); hp 95; Atk +18/+13 melee (2d6+16, *+1 greatclub*); SV Fort +14, Will +4; Str 30, Con 22; Climb +15, Jump +16. At the end of his rage, the ogre barbarian is fatigued for the duration of the encounter. 

#### Trap Sense (Ex)
An ogre barbarian has a +1 bonus on Reflex saves made to avoid traps. He also has a +1 bonus to his AC against attacks by traps. 

#### Uncanny Dodge (Ex)
An ogre barbarian retains his Dex bonus to AC regardless of being caught flat-footed or attacked by an invisible opponent. His Dex bonus to AC is +0, but this means that he is not subject to a rogue's sneak attack in these circumstances. 

### Merrow

These cousins of the ogre have the aquatic subtype. 

They dwell in freshwater lakes and rivers. They have a base land speed of 30 feet and a swim speed of 40 feet and are found only in aquatic environments. 

Instead of the typical ogre's greatclub, they prefer to use longspears in melee (attack +8 melee, damage 1d8+7). 

### Ogres as Characters

Ogre characters possess the following racial traits. 

-  +10 Strength, --2 Dexterity, +4 Constitution, --4 Intelligence, --4
Charisma. 

- Large size. --1 penalty to Armor Class, --1 penalty on attack rolls,
--4 penalty on Hide checks, +4 bonus on grapple checks, lifting and carrying limits double those of Medium characters. 

- Space/Reach: 10 feet/10 feet.

- An ogre's base land speed is 40 feet.

- Darkvision out to 60 feet.

- Racial Hit Dice: An ogre begins with four levels of giant, which
provide 4d8 Hit Dice, a base attack bonus of +3, and base saving throw bonuses of Fort +4, Ref +1, and Will +1. 

- Racial Skills: An ogre's giant levels give it skill points equal to 7
x (2 + Int modifier, minimum 1). Its class skills are Climb, Listen, and Spot. 

- Racial Feats: An ogre's giant levels give it two feats.

- Weapon and Armor Proficiency: An ogre is automatically proficient
with simple weapons, martial weapons, light and medium armor, and shields. 

-  +5 natural armor bonus.

- Automatic Languages: Common, Giant. Bonus Languages: Dwarven, Orc,
Goblin, Terran. 

- Favored Class: Barbarian.

- Level adjustment +2.

## Ogre Mage



|  | Large Giant | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 5d8+15 (37 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +4 | 
| Speed: | 40 ft. (8 squares), fly 40 ft. (good) | 
| Armor Class: | 18 (--1 size, +5 natural, +4 chain shirt), touch 9, flat-footed 18 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +3/+12 | 
| Attack: | Greatsword +7 melee (3d6+7/19--20) or longbow +2 ranged (2d6/x3) | 
| Full Attack: | Greatsword +7 melee (3d6+7/19--20) or longbow +2 ranged (2d6/x3) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Spell-like abilities | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 90 ft., low-light vision, regeneration 5, spell resistance 19 | 
| Saves: | Fort +7, Ref +1, Will +3 | 
| Abilities: | Str 21, Dex 10, Con 17, Int 14, Wis 14, Cha 17 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Concentration\|Concentration]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spellcraft\|Spellcraft]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +10; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Combat Expertise\|Combat Expertise]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] ; | 
| Environment: | Cold hills | 
| Organization: | Solitary, pair, or troupe (1--2 plus 2--4 ogres) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 8 | 
| Treasure: | Double standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually lawful evil | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | +7 | 
The ogre mage is a more intelligent and dangerous variety of its mundane cousin. 

An ogre mage stands about 10 feet tall and weighs up to 700 pounds. Its skin varies in color from light green to light blue, and its hair is black or very dark brown. Ogre mages favor loose, comfortable clothing and lightweight armor. 

Ogre mages speak Giant and Common. 

#### Combat

Ogre mages rely on their spell-like abilities, resorting to physical combat only when necessary. When faced with obviously superior forces, they prefer to retreat using *gaseous form* rather than fight a losing battle. 

#### Spell-Like Abilities
 - **At will:** [[3.5 Spell List#Darkness\|Darkness]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Invisibility\|Invisibility]] ;
 - **1/day:** [[3.5 Spell List#Charm Person\|Charm Person]] (DC 14), [[3.5 Spell List#Cone Of Cold\|Cone Of Cold]] (DC 18), [[3.5 Spell List#Gaseous Form\|Gaseous Form]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Polymorph\|Polymorph]] , [[3.5 Spell List#Sleep\|Sleep]] (DC 14);
 -  Caster level 9th. The save DCs are Charisma-based.

#### Flight (Su)
An ogre mage can cease or resume flight as a free action. While using *gaseous form* it can fly at its normal speed and has perfect maneuverability. 

#### Regeneration (Ex)
Fire and acid deal normal damage to an ogre mage. 

An ogre mage that loses a limb or body part can reattach it by holding the severed member to the stump. Reattachment takes 1 minute. If the head or some other vital organ is severed, it must be reattached within 10 minutes or the creature dies. An ogre mage cannot regrow lost body parts. 

### Ogre Mages as Characters

Ogre mage characters possess the following racial traits. 

-  +10 Strength, +6 Constitution, +4 Intelligence, +4 Wisdom, +6
Charisma. 

- Large size. --1 penalty to Armor Class, --1 penalty on attack rolls,
--4 penalty on Hide checks, +4 bonus on grapple checks, lifting and carrying limits double those of Medium characters. 

- Space/Reach: 10 feet/10 feet.

- An ogre mage's base land speed is 40 feet. It also has a fly speed of
40 feet (good). 

- Darkvision: Ogre mages can see in the dark up to 60 feet.

- Racial Hit Dice: An ogre mage begins with five levels of giant, which
provide 5d8 Hit Dice, a base attack bonus of +3, and base saving throw bonuses of Fort +4, Ref +1, and Will +1. 

- Racial Skills: An ogre mage's giant levels give it skill points equal
to 8 x (2 + Int modifier \[minimum 1\]). Its class skills are Concentration, Listen, Spellcraft, and Spot. 

- Racial Feats: An ogre mage's giant levels give it two feats.

-  +5 natural armor bonus.

- Special Attacks (see above): Spell-like abilities.

- Special Qualities (see above): Regeneration 5, spell resistance 19.

- Automatic Languages: Common, Giant. Bonus Languages: Dwarven, Goblin,
Infernal, Orc. 

- Favored Class: Sorcerer.

- Level adjustment +7.

## Ooze

Oozes are amorphous creatures that live only to eat. They inhabit underground areas throughout the world, scouring caverns, ruins, and dungeons in search of organic matter---living or dead. 

#### Combat

Oozes attack any creatures they encounter. They lash out with pseudopods or simply engulf opponents with their bodies, which secrete acids that help them catch or digest their prey. 

#### Blindsight (Ex)
An ooze's entire body is a primitive sensory organ that can ascertain prey by scent and vibration within 60 feet. 

### Black Pudding



|  | Black Pudding | Elder Black Pudding | 
|---|---|---|
|  | Huge Ooze | Gargantuan Ooze | 
| Hit Dice: | 10d10+60 (115 hp) | 20d10+180 (290 hp) | 
| Initiative: | --5 | --5 | 
| Speed: | 20 ft. (4 squares), climb 20 ft. | 20 ft. (4 squares), climb 20 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 3 (--2 size, --5 Dex), touch 3, flat-footed 3 | 1 (--4 size, --5 Dex), touch 1, flat-footed 1 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +7/+18 | +15/+35 | 
| Attack: | Slam +8 melee (2d6+4 plus 2d6 acid) | Slam +19 melee (3d6+12 plus 3d6 acid) | 
| Full Attack: | Slam +8 melee (2d6+4 plus 2d6 acid) | Slam +19 melee (3d6+12 plus 3d6 acid) | 
| Space/Reach: | 15 ft./10 ft. | 20 ft./20 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Acid, constrict 2d6+4 plus 2d6 acid, improved grab | Acid, constrict 2d8+12 plus 2d6 acid, improved grab | 
| Special Qualities: | Blindsight 60 ft., split, ooze traits | Blindsight 60 ft., split, ooze traits | 
| Saves: | Fort +9, Ref --2, Will --2 | Fort +15, Ref +1, Will +1 | 
| Abilities: | Str 17, Dex 1, Con 22, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1 | Str 26, Dex 1, Con 28, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +11; | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +16; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] ---; | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] ---; | 
| Environment: | Underground | Underground | 
| Organization: | Solitary | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 7 | 12 | 
| Treasure: | None | None | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral | Always neutral | 
| Advancement: | 11--15 HD (Huge); 16--30 HD (Gargantuan) | --- | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | --- | 
The typical black pudding measures 15 feet across and 2 feet thick. It weighs about 18,000 pounds. 

#### Combat

A black pudding attacks by grabbing and squeezing their prey. 

#### Acid (Ex)
The creature secretes a digestive acid that dissolves organic material and metal quickly, but does not affect stone. Any melee hit or constrict attack deals acid damage, and the opponent's armor and clothing dissolve and become useless immediately unless they succeed on DC 21 Reflex saves. A metal or wooden weapon that strikes a black pudding also dissolves immediately unless it succeeds on a DC 21 Reflex save. The save DCs are Constitution-based. 

The pudding's acidic touch deals 21 points of damage per round to wooden or metal objects, but the ooze must remain in contact with the object for 1 full round to deal this damage. 

#### Constrict (Ex)
A black pudding deals automatic slam and acid damage with a successful grapple check. The opponent's clothing and armor take a --4 penalty on Reflex saves against the acid. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, a black pudding must hit with its slam attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict. 

#### Split (Ex)
Slashing and piercing weapons deal no damage to a black pudding. Instead the creature splits into two identical puddings, each with half of the original's current hit points (round down). A pudding with 10 hit points or less cannot be further split and dies if reduced to 0 hit points. 

#### Skills
A black pudding has a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always choose to take 10 on a Climb check, even if rushed or threatened. 

### Elder Black Pudding

The most ancient black puddings are vast pools of inky death. 

#### Combat

The save DC for the elder black pudding's acid attack (DC 29) is adjusted for its additional Hit Dice and higher Constitution score. 

### Gelatinous Cube



|  | Huge Ooze | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 4d10+32 (54 hp) | 
| Initiative: | --5 | 
| Speed: | 15 ft. (3 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 3 (--2 size, --5 Dex), touch 3, flat-footed 3 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +3/+11 | 
| Attack: | Slam +1 melee (1d6 plus 1d6 acid) | 
| Full Attack: | Slam +1 melee (1d6 plus 1d6 acid) | 
| Space/Reach: | 15 ft./10 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Acid, engulf, paralysis | 
| Special Qualities: | Blindsight 60 ft., immunity to electricity, ooze traits, transparent | 
| Saves: | Fort +9, Ref --4, Will --4 | 
| Abilities: | Str 10, Dex 1, Con 26, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#\|]] ---; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] ---; | 
| Environment: | Underground | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 3 | 
| Treasure: | 1/10th coins, 50% goods (no nonmetal or nonstone), 50% items (no nonmetal or nonstone) | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral | 
| Advancement: | 5--12 HD (Huge); 13--24 HD (Gargantuan) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
The nearly transparent gelatinous cube travels slowly along dungeon corridors and cave floors, absorbing carrion, creatures, and trash. Inorganic material remains trapped and visible inside the cube's body. 

A typical gelatinous cube is 15 feet on a side and weighs about 50,000 pounds, though much larger specimens are not unknown. 

#### Combat

A gelatinous cube attacks by slamming its body into its prey. It is capable of lashing out with a pseudopod, but usually engulfs foes. 

#### Acid (Ex)
A gelatinous cube's acid does not harm metal or stone. 

#### Engulf (Ex)
Although it moves slowly, a gelatinous cube can simply mow down Large or smaller creatures as a standard action. It cannot make a slam attack during a round in which it engulfs. The gelatinous cube merely has to move over the opponents, affecting as many as it can cover. Opponents can make opportunity attacks against the cube, but if they do so they are not entitled to a saving throw. Those who do not attempt attacks of opportunity must succeed on a DC 13 Reflex save or be engulfed; on a success, they are pushed back or aside (opponent's choice) as the cube moves forward. Engulfed creatures are subject to the cube's paralysis and acid, and are considered to be grappled and trapped within its body. The save DC is Strength-based and includes a +1 racial bonus. 

#### Paralysis (Ex)
A gelatinous cube secretes an anesthetizing slime. A target hit by a cube's melee or engulf attack must succeed on a DC 20 Fortitude save or be paralyzed for 3d6 rounds. The cube can automatically engulf a paralyzed opponent. The save DC is Constitution-based. 

#### Transparent (Ex)
Gelatinous cubes are hard to see, even under ideal conditions, and it takes a DC 15 Spot check to notice one. Creatures who fail to notice a cube and walk into it are automatically engulfed. 

### Gray Ooze



|  | Medium Ooze | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 3d10+15 (31 hp) | 
| Initiative: | --5 | 
| Speed: | 10 ft. (2 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 5 (--5 Dex), touch 5, flat-footed 5 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +2/+3 | 
| Attack: | Slam +3 melee (1d6+1 plus 1d6 acid) | 
| Full Attack: | Slam +3 melee (1d6+1 plus 1d6 acid) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Acid, constrict 1d6+1 plus 1d6 acid, improved grab | 
| Special Qualities: | Blindsight 60 ft., immunity to cold and fire, ooze traits, transparent | 
| Saves: | Fort +6, Ref --4, Will --4 | 
| Abilities: | Str 12, Dex 1, Con 21, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#\|]] ---; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] ---; | 
| Environment: | Cold marshes | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 4 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral | 
| Advancement: | 4--6 HD (Medium); 7--9 HD (Large) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
A gray ooze can grow to a diameter of up to 10 feet and a thickness of about 6 inches. A typical specimen weighs about 700 pounds. 

#### Combat

A gray ooze strikes like a snake, slamming opponents with its body. 

#### Acid (Ex)
A gray ooze secretes a digestive acid that quickly dissolves organic material and metal, but not stone. Any melee hit or constrict attack deals acid damage. Armor or clothing dissolves and becomes useless immediately unless it succeeds on a DC 16 Reflex save. A metal or wooden weapon that strikes a gray ooze also dissolves immediately unless it succeeds on a DC 16 Reflex save. The save DCs are Constitution-based. 

The ooze's acidic touch deals 16 points of damage per round to wooden or metal objects, but the ooze must remain in contact with the object for 1 full round to deal this damage. 

#### Constrict (Ex)
A gray ooze deals automatic slam and acid damage with a successful grapple check. The opponent's clothing and armor take a --4 penalty on Reflex saves against the acid. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, a gray ooze must hit with its slam attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict. 

#### Transparent (Ex)
A gray ooze is hard to identify, even under ideal conditions, and it takes a DC 15 Spot check to notice one. Creatures who fail to notice a gray ooze and walk into it are automatically hit with a melee attack for slam and acid damage. 

### Ochre Jelly



|  | Large Ooze | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 6d10+36 (69 hp) | 
| Initiative: | --5 | 
| Speed: | 10 ft. (2 squares), climb 10 ft. | 
| Armor Class: | 4 (--1 size, --5 Dex), touch 4, flat-footed 4 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +4/+10 | 
| Attack: | Slam +5 melee (2d4+3 plus 1d4 acid) | 
| Full Attack: | Slam +5 melee (2d4+3 plus 1d4 acid) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Acid, constrict 2d4+3 plus 1d4 acid, improved grab | 
| Special Qualities: | Blindsight 60 ft., split, ooze traits | 
| Saves: | Fort +8, Ref --3, Will --3 | 
| Abilities: | Str 15, Dex 1, Con 22, Int ---, Wis 1, Cha 1 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +10; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#\|]] ---; | 
| Environment: | Temperate marshes | 
| Organization: | Solitary | 
| Challenge Rating: | 5 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral | 
| Advancement: | 7--9 HD (Large); 10--18 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
An ochre jelly can grow to a diameter of about 15 feet and a thickness of about 6 inches, but can compress its body to fit into cracks as small as 1 inch wide. A typical specimen weighs about 5,600 pounds. 

#### Combat

An ochre jelly attempts to envelop and squeeze its prey. 

#### Acid (Ex)
An ochre jelly secretes a digestive acid that dissolves only flesh. Any melee hit or constrict attack deals acid damage. 

#### Constrict (Ex)
An ochre jelly deals automatic slam and acid damage with a successful grapple check. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, an ochre jelly must hit with its slam attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict. 

#### Split (Ex)
Slashing and piercing weapons and electricity attacks deal no damage to an ochre jelly. Instead the creature splits into two identical jellies, each with half of the original's current hit points (round down). A jelly with 10 hit points or less cannot be further split and dies if reduced to 0 it points. 

#### Skills
An ochre jelly has a +8 racial bonus on Climb checks and can always choose to take 10 on a Climb check, even if rushed or threatened. 

## Orc



|  | Orc, 1st-Level Warrior | 
|---|---|
|  | Medium Humanoid (Orc) | 
| Hit Dice: | 1d8+1 (5 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +0 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 13 (+3 studded leather armor), touch 10, flat-footed 13 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +1/+4 | 
| Attack: | Falchion +4 melee (2d4+4/18--20) or javelin +1 ranged (1d6+3) | 
| Full Attack: | Falchion +4 melee (2d4+4/18--20) or javelin +1 ranged (1d6+3) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., light sensitivity | 
| Saves: | Fort +3, Ref +0, Will --2 | 
| Abilities: | Str 17, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 8, Wis 7, Cha 6 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +1, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +1; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate hills | 
| Organization: | Gang (2--4), squad (11--20 plus 2 3rd-level sergeants and 1 leader of 3rd--6th level), or band (30--100 plus 150% noncombatants plus 1 3rd-level sergeant per 10 adults, 5 5th-level lieutenants, and 3 7th-level captains) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 1/2 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Often chaotic evil | 
| Advancement: | By character class | 
| Level Adjustment: | +0 | 
An orc's hair usually is black. It has lupine ears and reddish eyes. Orcs prefer wearing vivid colors that many humans would consider unpleasant, such as blood red, mustard yellow, yellow-green, and deep purple. Their equipment is dirty and unkempt. An adult male orc is a little over 6 feet tall and weighs about 210 pounds. 

Females are slightly smaller. 

The language an orc speaks varies slightly from tribe to tribe, but any orc is understandable by someone else who speaks Orc. Some orcs know Goblin or Giant as well. 

Most orcs encountered away from their homes are warriors; the information in the statistics block is for one of 1st level. 

#### Combat

Orcs are proficient with all simple weapons, preferring those that cause the most damage in the least time. Many orcs who take up the warrior or fighter class also gain proficiency with the falchion or the greataxe as a martial weapon. They enjoy attacking from concealment and setting ambushes, and they obey the rules of war (such as honoring a truce) only as long as it is convenient for them. 

#### Light Sensitivity (Ex)
Orcs are dazzled in bright sunlight or within the radius of a *daylight* spell. 

#### Orcs as Characters

#### Orc Traits (Ex)
Orcs possess the following racial traits. 

-  +4 Strength, --2 Intelligence, --2 Wisdom, --2 Charisma.

- An orc's base land speed is 30 feet.

- Darkvision out to 60 feet.

- Light Sensitivity: Orcs are dazzled in bright sunlight or within the
radius of a *daylight* spell. 

- Automatic Languages: Common, Orc. Bonus Languages: Dwarven, Giant,
Gnoll, Goblin, Undercommon. 

- Favored Class: Barbarian.

The orc warrior presented here had the following ability scores before racial adjustments: Str 13, Dex 11, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 9, Cha 8. 

### Half-Orcs

These orc--human crossbreeds can be found in either orc or human society (where their status varies according to local sentiments), or in communities of their own. Half-orcs usually inherit a good blend of the physical characteristics of their parents. They are as tall as humans and a little heavier, thanks to their muscle. They have greenish pigmentation, sloping foreheads, jutting jaws, prominent teeth, and coarse body hair. Half-orcs who have lived among or near orcs have scars, in keeping with orcish tradition. 

#### Half-Orc Traits (Ex)
Half-orcs possess the following racial traits. 

-  +2 Strength, --2 Intelligence, --2 Charisma.

- Medium size.

- A half-orc's base land speed is 30 feet.

- Darkvision: Half-orcs can see in the dark up to 60 feet.

- Orc Blood: For all effects related to race, a half-orc is considered
an orc. 

- Automatic Languages: Common, Orc. Bonus Languages: Draconic, Giant,
Gnoll, Goblin, Abyssal. 

- Favored Class: Barbarian.

## Otyugh



|  | Large Aberration | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 6d8+9 (36 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +0 | 
| Speed: | 20 ft. (4 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 17 (--1 size, +8 natural), touch 9, flat-footed 17 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +4/+8 | 
| Attack: | Tentacle +4 melee (1d6) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 tentacles +4 melee (1d6) and bite --2 melee (1d4) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./10 ft. (15 ft. with tentacle) | 
| Special Attacks: | Constrict 1d6, disease, improved grab | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft., scent | 
| Saves: | Fort +3, Ref +2, Will +6 | 
| Abilities: | Str 11, Dex 10, Con 13, Int 5, Wis 12, Cha 6 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] --1\*, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +6; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Toughness\|Toughness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Focus\|Weapon Focus]] (tentacle); | 
| Environment: | Underground | 
| Organization: | Solitary, pair, or cluster (3--4) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 4 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Usually neutral | 
| Advancement: | 7--8 HD (Large); 9--18 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
A typical otyugh has a body 8 feet in diameter and weighs about 500 pounds. 

Otyughs speak Common. 

#### Combat

An otyugh attacks living creatures if it feels threatened or if it is hungry; otherwise it is content to remain hidden. Otyughs slash and squeeze opponents with their tentacles, which they also use to drag prey into their mouths. 

#### Constrict (Ex)
An otyugh deals automatic tentacle damage with a successful grapple check. 

#### Disease (Ex)
Filth fever---bite, Fortitude DC 14, incubation period 1d3 days; damage 1d3 Dex and 1d3 Con. The save DC is Constitution-based. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, an otyugh must hit with a tentacle attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. If it wins the grapple check, it establishes a hold and can constrict. 

#### Skills
\*An otyugh has a +8 racial bonus on Hide checks when in its lair, due to its natural coloration. 

## Owl, Giant



|  | Large Magical Beast | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 4d10+4 (26 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +3 | 
| Speed: | 10 ft. (2 squares), fly 70 ft. (average) | 
| Armor Class: | 15 (--1 size, +3 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 12 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +4/+12 | 
| Attack: | Claw +7 melee (1d6+4) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +7 melee (1d6+4) and bite +2 melee (1d8+2) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | --- | 
| Special Qualities: | Superior lowlight vision | 
| Saves: | Fort +5, Ref +7, Will +3 | 
| Abilities: | Str 18, Dex 17, Con 12, Int 10, Wis 14, Cha 10 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Knowledge\|Knowledge]] (nature) +2, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +17, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +8\*, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +10; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Monster Feats#Wingover\|Wingover]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate forests | 
| Organization: | Solitary, pair, or company (3--5) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 3 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Usually neutral good | 
| Advancement: | 5--8 HD (Large); 9--12 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | +2 (cohort) | 
Giant owls are nocturnal birds of prey, feared for their ability to hunt and attack in near silence. They are intelligent, and though naturally suspicious, sometimes associate with good creatures. A typical giant owl stands about 9 feet tall, has a wingspan of up to 20 feet, and resembles its smaller cousins in nearly every way except size. 

Giant owls speak Common and Sylvan. 

#### Combat

A giant owl attacks by gliding silently just a few feet above its prey and plunging to strike when directly overhead. 

### Superior Low-Light Vision (Ex)
A giant owl can see five times as far as a human can in dim light. 

#### Skills
Giant owls have a +8 racial bonus on Listen checks and a +4 racial bonus on Spot checks. 

\*When in flight, giant owls gain a +8 bonus on Move Silently checks. 

#### Training a Giant Owl

Although intelligent, a giant owl requires training before it can bear a rider in combat. To be trained, a giant owl must have a friendly attitude toward the trainer (this can be achieved through a successful Diplomacy check). Training a friendly giant owl requires six weeks of work and a DC 25 Handle Animal check. Riding a giant owl requires an exotic saddle. A giant owl can fight while carrying a rider, but the rider cannot also attack unless he or she succeeds on a Ride check. 

Giant owl eggs are worth 2,500 gp apiece on the open market, while chicks are worth 4,000 gp each. Professional trainers charge 1,000 gp to rear or train a giant owl. 

#### Carrying Capacity
A light load for a giant owl is up to 300 pounds; a medium load, 301--600 pounds; and a heavy load, 601--900 pounds. 

## Owlbear



|  | Large Magical Beast | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 5d10+25 (52 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 15 (--1 size, +1 Dex, +5 natural), touch 10, flat-footed 14 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +5/+14 | 
| Attack: | Claw +9 melee (1d6+5) | 
| Full Attack: | 2 claws +9 melee (1d6+5) and bite +4 melee (1d8+2) | 
| Space/Reach: | 10 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Improved grab | 
| Special Qualities: | Scent | 
| Saves: | Fort +9, Ref +5, Will +2 | 
| Abilities: | Str 21, Dex 12, Con 21, Int 2, Wis 12, Cha 10 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +8; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] , [[3.5 Feat List#Track\|Track]] ; | 
| Environment: | Temperate forests | 
| Organization: | Solitary, pair, or pack (3--8) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 4 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral | 
| Advancement: | 6--8 HD (Large); 9--15 HD (Huge) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
An owlbear's coat ranges in color from brown-black to yellowish brown; its beak is a dull ivory color. A full-grown male can stand as tall as 8 feet and weigh up to 1,500 pounds. Adventurers who have survived encounters with the creature often speak of the bestial madness they glimpsed in its red-rimmed eyes. 

#### Combat

Owlbears attack prey---any creature bigger than a mouse---on sight, always fighting to the death. They slash with claws and beak, trying to grab their prey and rip it apart. 

#### Improved Grab (Ex)
To use this ability, an owlbear must hit with a claw attack. It can then attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking an attack of opportunity. 

**[[3.5 Monsters - P|Next: Monsters P.]]
