---
lang: en
title: 3.5 Compendium / Monsters / 3.5 Monsters - V
aliases: 3.5 Monsters - V
tags: 3-5e/rules/monsters
---

# MONSTERS V

**[[3.5 Monsters - U|Previous: Monsters U.]]

## Vampire

Vampires appear just as they did in life, although their features are often hardened and feral, with the predatory look of wolves. 

Like liches, they often embrace finery and decadence and may assume the guise of nobility. Despite their human appearance, vampires can be easily recognized, for they cast no shadows and throw no reflections in mirrors. 

Vampires speak any languages they knew in life. 

### Creating a Vampire

"Vampire" is an acquired template that can be added to any humanoid or monstrous humanoid creature (referred to hereafter as the base creature). 

A vampire uses all the base creature's statistics and special abilities except as noted here. 

### Size and Type
The creature's type changes to undead (augmented humanoid or monstrous humanoid). Do not recalculate base attack bonus, saves, or skill points. Size is unchanged. 

### Hit Dice
Increase all current and future Hit Dice to d12s. 

### Speed
Same as the base creature. If the base creature has a swim speed, the vampire retains the ability to swim and is not vulnerable to immersion in running water (see below). 

### Armor Class
The base creature's natural armor bonus improves by +6. 

### Attack
A vampire retains all the attacks of the base creature and also gains a slam attack if it didn't already have one. If the base creature can use weapons, the vampire retains this ability. A creature with natural weapons retains those natural weapons. A vampire fighting without weapons uses either its slam attack or its primary natural weapon (if it has any). A vampire armed with a weapon uses its slam or a weapon, as it desires. 

### Full Attack
A vampire fighting without weapons uses either its slam attack (see above) or its natural weapons (if it has any). If armed with a weapon, it usually uses the weapon as its primary attack along with a slam or other natural weapon as a natural secondary attack. 

### Damage
Vampires have slam attacks. If the base creature does not have this attack form, use the appropriate damage value from the table below according to the vampire's size. Creatures that have other kinds of natural weapons retain their old damage values or use the appropriate value from the table below, whichever is better. 

|Size|Damage|
|---|---|
|Fine|1|
|Diminutive|1d2|
|Tiny|1d3|
|Small|1d4|
|Medium|1d6|
|Large|1d8|
|Huge|2d6|
|Gargantuan|2d8|
|Colossal|4d6|

### Special Attacks
A vampire retains all the special attacks of the base creature and gains those described below. Saves have a DC of 10 + 1/2 vampire's HD + vampire's Cha modifier unless noted otherwise. 

***Blood Drain (Ex):***A vampire can suck blood from a living victim with its fangs by making a successful grapple check. If it pins the foe, it drains blood, dealing 1d4 points of Constitution drain each round the pin is maintained. On each such successful attack, the vampire gains 5 temporary hit points. 

***Children of the Night (Su):***Vampires command the lesser creatures of the world and once per day can call forth 1d6+1 rat swarms, 1d4+1 bat swarms, or a pack of 3d6 wolves as a standard action. (If the base creature is not terrestrial, this power might summon other creatures of similar power.) These creatures arrive in 2d6 rounds and serve the vampire for up to 1 hour. 

***Dominate (Su):***A vampire can crush an opponent's will just by looking onto his or her eyes. This is similar to a gaze attack, except that the vampire must use a standard action, and those merely looking at it are not affected. Anyone the vampire targets must succeed on a Will save or fall instantly under the vampire's influence as though by a *dominate person* spell (caster level 12th). The ability has a range of 30 feet. 

***Create Spawn (Su):***A humanoid or monstrous humanoid slain by a vampire's energy drain rises as a vampire spawn (see the Vampire Spawn entry) 1d4 days after burial. 

If the vampire instead drains the victim's Constitution to 0 or lower, the victim returns as a spawn if it had 4 or less HD and as a vampire if it had 5 or more HD. In either case, the new vampire or spawn is under the command of the vampire that created it and remains enslaved until its master's destruction. At any given time a vampire may have enslaved spawn totaling no more than twice its own Hit Dice; any spawn it creates that would exceed this limit are created as free-willed vampires or vampire spawn. A vampire that is enslaved may create and enslave spawn of its own, so a master vampire can control a number of lesser vampires in this fashion. A vampire may voluntarily free an enslaved spawn in order to enslave a new spawn, but once freed, a vampire or vampire spawn cannot be enslaved again. 

***Energy Drain (Su):***Living creatures hit by a vampire's slam attack (or any other natural weapon the vampire might possess) gain two negative levels. For each negative level bestowed, the vampire gains 5 temporary hit points. A vampire can use its energy drain ability once per round. 

#### Special Qualities
A vampire retains all the special qualities of the base creature and gains those described below. 

*Alternate Form (Su):* A vampire can assume the shape of a bat, dire bat, wolf, or dire wolf as a standard action. This ability is similar to a *polymorph* spell cast by a 12th-level character, except that the vampire does not regain hit points for changing form and must choose from among the forms mentioned here. While in its alternate form, the vampire loses its natural slam attack and dominate ability, but it gains the natural weapons and extraordinary special attacks of its new form. It can remain in that form until it assumes another or until the next sunrise. (If the base creature is not terrestrial, this power might allow other forms.) 

*Damage Reduction (Su):* A vampire has damage reduction 10/silver and magic. A vampire's natural weapons are treated as magic weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

*Fast Healing (Ex):* A vampire heals 5 points of damage each round so long as it has at least 1 hit point. If reduced to 0 hit points in combat, it automatically assumes gaseous form and attempts to escape. It must reach its coffin home within 2 hours or be utterly destroyed. (It can travel up to nine miles in 2 hours.) Any additional damage dealt to a vampire forced into gaseous form has no effect. Once at rest in its coffin, a vampire is helpless. It regains 1 hit point after 1 hour, then is no longer helpless and resumes healing at the rate of 5 hit points per round. 

*Gaseous Form (Su):* As a standard action, a vampire can assume gaseous form at will as the spell (caster level 5th), but it can remain gaseous indefinitely and has a fly speed of 20 feet with perfect maneuverability. 

*Resistances (Ex):* A vampire has resistance to cold 10 and electricity 10. 

*Spider Climb (Ex):* A vampire can climb sheer surfaces as though with a *spider climb* spell. 

*Turn Resistance (Ex):* A vampire has +4 turn resistance. 

#### Abilities
Increase from the base creature as follows: Str +6, Dex +4, Int +2, Wis +2, Cha +4. As an undead creature, a vampire has no Constitution score. 

#### Skills
Vampires have a +8 racial bonus on Bluff, Hide, Listen, Move Silently, Search, Sense Motive, and Spot checks. Otherwise same as the base creature. 

#### Feats
Vampires gain Alertness, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Improved Initiative, and Lightning Reflexes, assuming the base creature meets the prerequisites and doesn't already have these feats. 

#### Environment
Any, usually same as base creature. 

#### Organization
Solitary, pair, gang (3--5), or troupe (1--2 plus 2--5 vampire spawn) 

#### Challenge Rating
Same as the base creature +2. 

#### Treasure
Double standard. 

#### Alignment
Always evil (any). 

#### Advancement
By character class. 

#### Level Adjustment
Same as the base creature +8. 

#### Vampire Weaknesses

For all their power, vampires have a number of weaknesses. 

### Repelling a Vampire
Vampires cannot tolerate the strong odor of garlic and will not enter an area laced with it. Similarly, they recoil from a mirror or a strongly presented holy symbol. These things don't harm the vampire---they merely keep it at bay. A recoiling vampire must stay at least 5 feet away from a creature holding the mirror or holy symbol and cannot touch or make melee attacks against the creature holding the item for the rest of the encounter. Holding a vampire at bay takes a standard action. 

Vampires are also unable to cross running water, although they can be carried over it while resting in their coffins or aboard a ship. 

They are utterly unable to enter a home or other building unless invited in by someone with the authority to do so. They may freely enter public places, since these are by definition open to all. 

### Slaying a Vampire
Reducing a vampire's hit points to 0 or lower incapacitates it but doesn't always destroy it (see the note on fast healing). However, certain attacks can slay vampires. Exposing any vampire to direct sunlight disorients it: It can take only a single move action or attack action and is destroyed utterly in the next round if it cannot escape. Similarly, immersing a vampire in running water robs it of one-third of its hit points each round until it is destroyed at the end of the third round of immersion. Driving a wooden stake through a vampire's heart instantly slays the monster. However, it returns to life if the stake is removed, unless the body is destroyed. A popular tactic is to cut off the creature's head and fill its mouth with holy wafers (or their equivalent). 

#### Vampire Characters

Vampires are always evil, which causes characters of certain classes to lose some class abilities. In addition, certain classes take additional penalties. 

### Clerics
Vampire clerics lose their ability to turn undead but gain the ability to rebuke undead. This ability does not affect the vampire's controller or any other vampires that a master controls. A vampire cleric has access to two of the following domains: Chaos, Destruction, Evil, or Trickery. 

### Sorcerers and Wizards
Vampire sorcerers and wizards retain their class abilities, but if a character has a familiar other than a rat or bat, the link between them is broken, and the familiar shuns its former companion. The character can summon another familiar, but it must be a rat or bat. 

## Vampire Spawn



|  | Medium Undead | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 4d12+3 (29 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +6 | 
| Speed: | 30 ft. (6 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 15 (+2 Dex, +3 natural), touch 12, flat-footed 13 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +2/+5 | 
| Attack: | Slam +5 melee (1d6+4 plus energy drain) | 
| Full Attack: | Slam +5 melee (1d6+4 plus energy drain) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Blood drain, domination, energy drain | 
| Special Qualities: | +2 turn resistance, damage reduction 5/silver, darkvision 60 ft., fast healing 2, gaseous form, resistance to cold 10 and electricity 10, spider climb, undead traits | 
| Saves: | Fort +1, Ref +5, Will +5 | 
| Abilities: | Str 16, Dex 14, Con ---, Int 13, Wis 13, Cha 14 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Bluff\|Bluff]] +6, [[3.5 Skill List#Climb\|Climb]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Craft Or Profession\|Craft Or Profession]] (any One) +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Diplomacy\|Diplomacy]] +4, [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Jump\|Jump]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +10, [[3.5 Skill List#Search\|Search]] +8, [[3.5 Skill List#Sense Motive\|Sense Motive]] +11, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +11; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Alertness\|Alertness]] (B), [[3.5 Feat List#Improved Initiative\|Improved Initiative]] (B), [[3.5 Feat List#Lightning Reflexes\|Lightning Reflexes]] (B), [[3.5 Feat List#Skill Focus\|Skill Focus]] (selected Craft Or Profession Skill), [[3.5 Feat List#Toughness\|Toughness]] ; | 
| Environment: | Any | 
| Organization: | Solitary or pack (2--5) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 4 | 
| Treasure: | Standard | 
| Alignment: | Always evil (any) | 
| Advancement: | --- | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
Vampire spawn are undead creatures that come into being when vampires slay mortals. Like their creators, spawn remain bound to their coffins and to the soil of their graves. Vampire spawn appear much as they did in life, although their features are often hardened, with a predatory look. 

Vampire spawn speak Common. 

#### Combat

Vampire spawn use their inhuman strength when engaging mortals, hammering their foes with powerful blows and dashing them against rocks or walls. They also use their gaseous form and flight abilities to strike where opponents are most vulnerable. 

### Blood Drain (Ex)
A vampire spawn can suck blood from a living victim with its fangs by making a successful grapple check. If it pins the foe, it drains blood, dealing 1d4 points of Constitution drain each round. On each such successful drain attack, the vampire spawn gains 5 temporary hit pints. 

### Domination (Su)
A vampire spawn can crush an opponent's will just by looking onto his or her eyes. This is similar to a gaze attack, except that the vampire must take a standard action, and those merely looking at it are not affected. Anyone the vampire targets must succeed on a DC 14 Will save or fall instantly under the vampire's influence as though by a *dominate person* spell from a 5thlevel caster. The ability has a range of 30 feet. The save DC is Charisma-based. 

#### Energy Drain (Su)
Living creatures hit by a vampire spawn's slam attack gain one negative level. The DC is 14 for the Fortitude save to remove a negative level. The save DC is Charisma-based. For each such negative level bestowed, the vampire spawn gains 5 temporary hit points. 

#### Fast Healing (Ex)
A vampire spawn heals 2 points of damage each round so long as it has at least 1 hit point. If reduced to 0 hit points in combat, it automatically assumes gaseous form and attempts to escape. It must reach its coffin home within 2 hours or be utterly destroyed. (It can travel up to nine miles in 2 hours.) Once at rest in its coffin, it is helpless. It regains 1 hit point after 1 hour, then is no longer helpless and resumes healing at the rate of 2 hit points per round. 

### Gaseous Form (Su)
As a standard action, a vampire spawn can assume *gaseous form* at will as the spell (caster level 6th), but it can remain gaseous indefinitely and has a fly speed of 20 feet with perfect maneuverability. 

### Spider Climb (Ex)
A vampire spawn can climb sheer surfaces as though with a *spider climb* spell. 

#### Skills
Vampire spawn have a +4 racial bonus on Bluff, Hide, Listen, Move Silently, Search, Sense Motive, and Spot checks. 

### Vampire Spawn Weaknesses

Vampire spawn are vulnerable to all attacks and effects that repel or slay vampires. For details, see the Vampire entry. 

## Vargouille



|  | Small Outsider (Evil, Extraplanar) | 
|---|---|
| Hit Dice: | 1d8+1 (5 hp) | 
| Initiative: | +1 | 
| Speed: | Fly 30 ft. (good) (6 squares) | 
| Armor Class: | 12 (+1 size, +1 Dex), touch 11, flat-footed 11 | 
| Base Attack/Grapple: | +1/--3 | 
| Attack: | Bite +3 melee (1d4 plus poison) | 
| Full Attack: | Bite +3 melee (1d4 plus poison) | 
| Space/Reach: | 5 ft./5 ft. | 
| Special Attacks: | Shriek, kiss, poison | 
| Special Qualities: | Darkvision 60 ft. | 
| Saves: | Fort +3, Ref +3, Will +3 | 
| Abilities: | Str 10, Dex 13, Con 12, Int 5, Wis 12, Cha 8 | 
| Skills: | [[3.5 Skill List#Hide\|Hide]] +9, [[3.5 Skill List#Intimidate\|Intimidate]] +3, [[3.5 Skill List#Listen\|Listen]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Move Silently\|Move Silently]] +5, [[3.5 Skill List#Spot\|Spot]] +5; | 
| Feats: | [[3.5 Feat List#Weapon Finesse\|Weapon Finesse]] ; | 
| Environment: | An evil-aligned plane | 
| Organization: | Cluster (2--5) or mob (6--11) | 
| Challenge Rating: | 2 | 
| Treasure: | None | 
| Alignment: | Always neutral evil | 
| Advancement: | 2--3 HD (Small) | 
| Level Adjustment: | --- | 
A vargouille is slightly larger than a human head, about 18 inches high, with a wingspan of 4 feet. It weighs about 10 pounds. 

Vargouilles speak Infernal. 

#### Combat

Vargouilles attack by biting with their jagged teeth. Their special attacks make them even more dangerous. A vargouille's natural weapons, as well as any weapons it wields, are treated as evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. 

### Shriek (Su)
Instead of biting, a vargouille can open its distended mouth and let out a terrible shriek. Those within 60 feet (except other vargouilles) who hear the shriek and can clearly see the creature must succeed on a DC 12 Fortitude save or be paralyzed with fear for 2d4 rounds or until the monster attacks them, goes out of range, or leaves their sight. A paralyzed creature is susceptible to the vargouille's kiss (see below). A creature that successfully saves cannot be affected again by the same vargouille's shriek for 24 hours. The shriek is a mind-affecting fear effect. The save DC is Constitution-based and includes a +1 racial bonus. 

#### Kiss (Su)
A vargouille can kiss a paralyzed target with a successful melee touch attack. An affected opponent must succeed on a DC 15 Fortitude save or begin a terrible transformation that turns the creature into a vargouille within 24 hours (and often much sooner; roll 1d6 separately for each phase of the transformation). 

First, over a period of 1d6 hours, all the victim's hair falls out. Within another 1d6 hours thereafter, the ears grow into leathery wings, tentacles sprout on the chin and scalp, and the teeth become long, pointed fangs. During the next 1d6 hours, the victim takes Intelligence drain and Charisma drain equal to 1 point per hour (to a minimum of 3). The transformation is complete 1d6 hours later, when the head breaks free of the body (which promptly dies) and becomes a vargouille. This transformation is interrupted by sunlight, and even a *daylight* spell can delay death, but to reverse the transformation requires *remove disease*. The save DC is Constitution-based and includes a +4 racial bonus. 

#### Poison (Ex)
Injury, Fortitude DC 12 or be unable to heal the vargouille's bite damage naturally or magically. A *neutralize poison* or *heal* spell removes the effect, while *delay poison* allows magical healing. The save DC is Constitution-based and includes a +1 racial bonus. 

**[[3.5 Monsters - W|Next: Monsters W.]]
