---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Epic / Epic Obstacles
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# EPIC OBSTACLES

## Table of Contents

-   [Walls](#walls)
-   [Doors](#doors)
-   [Obstacles and Hazards](#obstacles-and-hazards)
-   [Slimes, Molds, and Fungi](#slimes-molds-and-fungi)

## Walls

In addition to the standard types of wall, walls in dungeons can be made
of mithral, adamantine, or even pure force.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------- ---------- ---------- -------------- ----------
  Wall Type                                                                      Typical Thickness   Break DC   Hardness   Hit Points\*   Climb DC
  Paper                                                                          Paper-thin          1          ---        1hp            30
  Wood                                                                           6in.                20         5          60hp           21
  Masonry                                                                        1ft.                35         8          90hp           15
  Masonry, superior                                                              1ft.                35         8          90hp           20
  Masonry, reinforced                                                            1ft.                45         8          180hp          15
  Stone, hewn                                                                    3ft.                50         8          540hp          22
  Stone, unworked                                                                5ft.                65         8          900hp          20
  Iron                                                                           3in.                30         10         90hp           25
  Mithral                                                                        3in.                46         15         90hp           70
  Adamantine                                                                     3in.                66         20         120hp          70
  Magically treated\*\*                                                          ---                 20         x2         x2†            ---
  Wall of force                                                                  1in.                n/a        n/a        n/a            70
  Wall of ice                                                                    1in./lvl            15+1/in.   0          3hp/in.        25
  Wall of iron                                                                   1in./4lvls          25+2/in.   10         30hp/in.       25
  Wall of stone                                                                  1in./4lvls          20+2/in.   8          15hp/in.       22
  \*Per 10-ft.-by-10-ft. section.                                                                                                         
  \*\*These modifiers can be applied to any of the other categories and types.                                                            
  †Or 50, whichever is greater.                                                                                                           
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------- ---------- ---------- -------------- ----------

## Doors

  --------------------------------------------------------- ------------------- ---------- ------------ ---------- --------
                                                                                                        Break DC   
  Door Type                                                 Typical Thickness   Hardness   Hit Points   Stuck      Locked
  Simple wooden                                             1 in.               5          10 hp        13         15
  Good wooden                                               1 1/2 in.           5          15 hp        16         18
  Strong wooden                                             2 in.               5          20 hp        23         25
  Stone                                                     4 in.               8          60 hp        28         28
  Iron                                                      2 in.               10         60 hp        28         28
  Mithral                                                   2 in.               15         60 hp        40         40
  Adamantine                                                2 in.               20         80 hp        60         60
  Force                                                     1 in.               n/a        n/a          n/a        n/a
  Portcullis, wodden                                        3 in.               5          30 hp        25\*       25\*
  Portcullis, iron                                          2 in.               10         60 hp        25\*       25\*
  Portcullis, mithral                                       2 in.               15         60 hp        30\*       30\*
  Portcullis, adamatine                                     2 in.               20         80 hp        40\*       40\*
  Portcullis, force                                         1 in.               10         n/a          n/a        50\*
  \*DC to lift. Use appropriate door figure for breaking.                                                          
  --------------------------------------------------------- ------------------- ---------- ------------ ---------- --------

## Obstacles and Hazards

  ------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Obstacle/Hazard                Effect
  Acid tank                      1d6 damage per round, or 10d6 per round for total immersion; plus poison fumes.
  Antimagic field                Negates all spells or magical effects.
  *Dimensional anchor* trap      Blocks bodily extradimensional travel.
  Hurricane-force winds          Ranged attacks impossible, flight virtually impossible.
  Lava pit                       2d6 damage per round, or 20d6 per round for total immersion; plus continuing damage.
  Permanent *prismatic sphere*   Requires seven different spells to bypass.
  Permanent *solid fog*          Move at one-tenth normal speed, --2 penalty on attack and damage (good when coupled with incorporeal monsters).
  Permanent *wall of force*      Blocks most spells and ethereal travel, can't be *dispelled*.
  Three-dimensional dungeons     Levitation/flying required to move between areas.
  Unconnected rooms              Teleportation required to move between areas.
  Variable gravity               As *reverse gravity*, but direction random each round.
  ------------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Slimes, Molds, and Fungi

For purposes of spells and other special effects, all slimes, molds, and
fungi are treated as plants. Like traps, dangerous slimes and molds have
Challenge Ratings, and characters earn experience points for
encountering them.

**Flux Slime (CR 21):**

Flux slime appears as a clear, viscous liquid that seeps from some
unseen origin point. This origin point is extradimensional, so the slime
may even appear in midair. As the slime flows, it settles and fills the
area around the origin point.

Flux slime seems to be an inert substance, devoid of sentience. It is
not caustic or toxic, but it radiates an *antimagic field* within a
radius of 10 feet. This *antimagic field* has a caster level of 21. Any
quantity of slime that is removed from the main mass yellows and hardens
in a matter of minutes, turning into a flaky material that will not
adhere to anything.

In reality, flux slime is a growth with a ravenous appetite for magical
forces. It is a natural draining phenomenon: Magical energy drains
through the origin point in one direction in exchange for the residue on
the far side. The *antimagic field* a flux slime generates is actually
the byproduct of the consumption of magical energy.

In addition to the *antimagic field's*effects, magic items that come
into contact with flux slime permanently lose their magical abilities;
creatures with spell-like or super-natural abilities that come into
contact with it take 2d6 points of temporary Constitution damage per
round while it devours flesh; creatures without such abilities are
immune to this effect.

On the first round of contact, the slime can be scraped off a creature,
but after that it must be frozen, burned, or cut away (dealing damage to
the victim as well). Extreme cold, heat, or sunlight destroys a patch of
flux slime.

When destroyed, a patch of slime releases the byproducts of its magical
digestion in a dangerous burst that radiates out 50 feet. All creatures
caught in this burst are subject to some random and permanent
transmutation effect, as generated on the table below. Each burst
generates one of these effects. Creatures may resist this effect with a
Fortitude saving throw (DC 29).

  -------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  d%       Result
  01--10   Blindness (as blindness/deafness spell)
  11--16   Cursed (as bestow curse spell; --4 enhancement penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks)
  17--26   Deafness (as blindness/deafness spell)
  27--32   Disintegrate (subject is destroyed by a disintegrate spell)
  33--40   Etherealness (as etherealness spell)
  41--48   Gaseous (as gaseous form spell)
  49--54   Iron body (as iron body spell)
  55--60   Petrification (as flesh to stone spell)
  61--68   Plane shift (subject instantly transports to a random plane)
  69--74   Polymorph (as polymorph other spell; choose form randomly)
  75--80   Reverse gravity (flux slime becomes the center of a reverse gravity spell).
  81--88   Teleport (each subject teleports to a different, random location)
  89--94   Temporal stasis (as temporal stasis spell)
  95--00   Reverse aging (subject gets younger each year, disappearing at moment of "birth")
  -------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the burst, the extradimensional origin point is sealed.
