---
lang: en
title: v3.5 SRD / Epic / Epic Classes
viewport: width=device-width,minimum-scale=1.0
---

This material is Open Game Content, and is licensed for public use under
the terms of the Open Game License v1.0a.

# EPIC CLASS PROGRESSIONS

## Table of Contents

-   [Epic Barbarian](#epic-barbarian)
-   [Epic Bard](#epic-bard)
-   [Epic Cleric](#epic-cleric)
-   [Epic Druid](#epic-druid)
-   [Epic Fighter](#epic-fighter)
-   [Epic Monk](#epic-monk)
-   [Epic Paladin](#epic-paladin)
-   [Epic Ranger](#epic-ranger)
-   [Epic Rogue](#epic-rogue)
-   [Epic Sorcerer](#epic-sorcerer)
-   [Epic Wizard](#epic-wizard)
    -   [Familiars at Epic Level](#familiars-at-epic-level)
-   [Epic Psionic Class Progressions](#epic-psionic-class-progressions)
    -   [No Epic Bonus Power
        Progression](#no-epic-bonus-power-progression)
-   [Epic Psion](#epic-psion)
    -   [Psicrystals at Epic Level](#psicrystals-at-epic-level)
-   [Epic Psychic Warrior](#epic-psychic-warrior)
-   [Epic Soulknife](#epic-soulknife)
-   [Epic Wilder](#epic-wilder)

## Epic Barbarian

**Hit Die:** d12

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 4 + Int modifier

**Barbarian Rage:** The epic barbarian gains one use of rage per day
every four levels after 20th.

**Trap Sense (Ex):** The epic barbarian's bonus increases by +1 every
three levels higher than 18th.

**Damage Reduction (Ex):** The epic barbarian's damage reduction
increases by 1 point every three levels higher than 19th.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic barbarian gains a bonus feat (selected from
the list of epic barbarian bonus feats) every four levels higher than
20th.

***Epic Barbarian Bonus Feat List:*** Armor Skin, Chaotic Rage, Damage
Reduction, Devastating Critical, Dire Charge, Epic Endurance, Epic
Prowess, Epic Speed, Epic Toughness, Epic Weapon Focus, Fast Healing,
Incite Rage, Legendary Climber, Legendary Leaper, Legendary Rider,
Legendary Tracker, Legendary Wrestler, Mighty Rage, Overwhelming
Critical, Ruinous Rage, Terrifying Rage, Thundering Rage.

  ----------------- -----------------------------------------------
  Barbarian Level   Special
  21st              Trap sense +7
  22nd              Damage reduction 6/--
  23rd              ---
  24th              Rage 7/day, Trap sense +8, bonus feat
  25th              Damage reduction 7/--
  26th              ---
  27th              Trap sense +9
  28th              Damage reduction 8/--, Rage 8/day, bonus feat
  29th              ---
  30th              Trap sense +10
  ----------------- -----------------------------------------------

  : Table: The Epic Barbarian

## Epic Bard

**Hit Die:** d6

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 6 + Int modifier

**Spells:** The bard's caster level is equal to his or her class level.
The bard's number of spells per day does not increase after 20th level.
The bard does not learn additional spells unless he or she selects the
Spell Knowledge feat.

**Bardic Music:** The bard gains no new bardic music effects from his or
her Perform ranks. However, he or she may select epic feats that grant
new bardic music effects

**Bardic Knowledge:** Add the bard's class level + Intelligence modifier
to all bardic knowledge checks, as normal.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic bard gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic bard bonus feats) every three levels after 20th.

*Epic Bard Bonus Feat List:* Augmented Alchemy, Deafening Song, Epic
Inspiration, Epic Leadership, Epic Reputation, Epic Skill Focus, Group
Inspiration, Hindering Song, Improved Combat Casting, Improved
Metamagic, Improved Spell Capacity, Inspire Excellence, Lasting
Inspiration, Master Staff, Master Wand, Music of the Gods, Permanent
Emanation, Polyglot, Ranged Inspiration, Rapid Inspiration, Reactive
Countersong, Spell Knowledge, Spell Stowaway, Spell Opportunity,
Tenacious Magic.

**Inspire Courage (Su):** The epic bard's bonus when this ability is
used increases by +1 every six levels higher than 20^th^.

  ------------ --------------------------------
  Bard Level   Special
  21st         ---
  22nd         ---
  23rd         Bonus feat
  24th         ---
  25th         ---
  26th         Inspire Courage +5, Bonus feat
  27th         ---
  28th         ---
  29th         Bonus feat
  30th         ---
  ------------ --------------------------------

  : Table: The Epic Bard

## Epic Cleric

**Hit Die:** d8

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier

**Spells:** The cleric's caster level is equal to his or her class
level. The cleric's number of spells per day does not increase after
20th level

**Turn or Rebuke Undead:** Use the cleric's class level to determine the
most powerful undead affected by a turn or rebuke check and the turning
damage, just as normal.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic cleric gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic cleric bonus feats) every three levels after 20th.

*Epic Cleric Bonus Feat List:* Armor Skin, Automatic Quicken Spell,
Automatic Silent Spell, Automatic Still Spell, Bonus Domain, Enhance
Spell, Epic Spell Focus, Epic Spell Penetration, Epic Spellcasting,
Ignore Material Components, Improved Alignment-Based Casting, Improved
Combat Casting, Improved Heighten Spell, Improved Metamagic, Improved
Spell Capacity, Intensify Spell, Multispell, Negative Energy Burst,
Permanent Emanation, Planar Turning, Positive Energy Aura, Spectral
Strike, Spell Stowaway, Spell Opportunity, Spontaneous Domain Access,
Spontaneous Spell, Tenacious Magic, Undead Mastery, Zone of Animation.

  -------------- ------------
  Cleric Level   Special
  21st           ---
  22nd           ---
  23rd           Bonus feat
  24th           ---
  25th           ---
  26th           Bonus feat
  27th           ---
  28th           ---
  29th           Bonus feat
  30th           ---
  -------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Cleric

## Epic Druid

**Hit Die:** d8

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 4 + Int modifier

**Spells:** The druid's caster level is equal to his or her class level.
The druid's number of spells per day does not increase after 20th level.

**Animal Companion:** The Druid's animal companion continues to increase
in power. Every three levels higher than 20^th^ the animal companion
gains 2 bonus hit dice, +1 strength and dexterity, and an additional
trick.

***Wild Shape:***The epic druid can use this ability to take the form of
an animal one additional time per day every four levels higher than
18th. The druid's ability to wild shape into an elemental does not
improve.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic druid gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic druid bonus feats) every four levels after 20th.

Epic Druid Bonus Feat List: Automatic Quicken Spell, Automatic Silent
Spell, Automatic Still Spell, Colossal Wild Shape, Diminutive Wild
Shape, Dragon Wild Shape, Energy Resistance, Enhance Spell, Epic Spell
Focus, Epic Spell Penetration, Epic Spellcasting, Fast Healing, Fine
Wild Shape, Gargantuan Wild Shape, Ignore Material Components, Improved
Combat Casting, Improved Elemental Wild Shape, Improved Heighten Spell,
Improved Metamagic, Improved Spell Capacity, Intensify Spell, Magical
Beast Companion, Magical Beast Wild Shape, Multi-spell, Perfect Health,
Permanent Emanation, Plant Wild Shape, Spell Stowaway, Spell
Opportunity, Spontaneous Spell, Tenacious Magic, Vermin Wild Shape.

  ------------- --------------------
  Druid Level   Special
  21st          ---
  22nd          *Wild shape* 7/day
  23rd          ---
  24th          Bonus feat
  25th          ---
  26th          *Wild shape* 8/day
  27th          ---
  28th          Bonus feat
  29th          ---
  30th          *Wild shape* 9/day
  ------------- --------------------

  : Table: The Epic Druid

## Epic Fighter

**Hit Die:** d10

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier

**Bonus Feats:** The epic fighter gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic fighter bonus feats) every two levels after 20th.

*Epic Fighter Bonus Feat List:* Armor Skin, Combat Archery, Damage
Reduction, Devastating Critical, Dire Charge, Distant Shot, Energy
Resistance, Epic Endurance, Epic Leadership, Epic Prowess, Epic
Toughness, Epic Weapon Focus, Epic Weapon Specialization, Exceptional
Deflection, Improved Combat Reflexes, Improved Manyshot, Improved
Stunning Fist, Improved Whirlwind Attack, Infinite Deflection, Instant
Reload, Legendary Commander, Legendary Rider, Legendary Wrestler,
Overwhelming Critical, Penetrate Damage Reduction, Perfect Two-Weapon
Fighting, Reflect Arrows, Spellcasting Harrier, Storm of Throws,
Superior Initiative, Swarm of Arrows, Two-Weapon Rend, Uncanny Accuracy.
In addition to the feats on this list, the fighter may treat any feat
designated as a fighter bonus feat, but not listed here, as being on his
or her bonus feat list.

  --------------- ------------
  Fighter Level   Special
  21st            ---
  22nd            Bonus feat
  23rd            ---
  24th            Bonus feat
  25th            ---
  26th            Bonus feat
  27th            ---
  28th            Bonus feat
  29th            ---
  30th            Bonus feat
  --------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Fighter

## Epic Monk

**Hit Die:** d8

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 4 + Int modifier

**AC Bonus:** The monk's bonus to Armor Class when unarmored increases
by +1 every five levels higher than 20th.

**Unarmed Strike:** The damage for a monk's unarmed strike does not
increase after 16th level.

**Stunning Attack:** If the monk has the Stunning Fist feat use the
monk's class level when determining the DC to resist this attack, as
normal.

**Unarmored Speed Bonus:** The epic monk's speed when wearing no armor
increases by 10 feet every three levels higher than 18th. The unarmored
speed of Small and dwarven monks increases by 5 feet instead of 10 feet.

***Ki* Strike:** The monk's *ki* strike ability does not automatically
increase with class level after 16th level.

**Wholeness of Body (Su):** The epic monk can cure up to twice his or
her class level in hit points each day, as normal.

**Abundant Step (Su):** Use the monk's class level when determining the
effective caster level of this ability, as normal.

**Diamond Soul (Ex):** The epic monk's spell resistance is equal to his
or her class level +10, as normal.

**Quivering Palm (Su):** Use the monk's class level when determining the
DC to resist this attack, as normal.

**Empty Body (Su):** Use the monk's class level when determining the
duration of this effect, as normal.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic monk gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic monk bonus feats) every five levels higher than 20th.

*Epic Monk Bonus Feat List:* Armor Skin, Blinding Speed, Damage
Reduction, Energy Resistance, Epic Prowess, Epic Speed, Epic Toughness,
Exceptional Deflection, Fast Healing, Improved Combat Reflexes, Improved
*Ki* Strike, Improved Spell Resistance, Improved Stunning Fist, Infinite
Deflection, Keen Strike, Legendary Climber, Legendary Wrestler, Reflect
Arrows, Righteous Strike, Self-Concealment, Shattering Strike, Vorpal
Strike.

  ------------ ---------- ----------------------- ------------
  Monk Level   AC Bonus   Unarmored Speed Bonus   Special
  21st         +4         +70 ft.                 
  22nd         +4         +70 ft.                 
  23rd         +4         +70 ft.                 
  24th         +4         +80 ft.                 
  25th         +5         +80 ft.                 Bonus feat
  26th         +5         +80 ft.                 
  27th         +5         +90 ft.                 
  28th         +5         +90 ft.                 
  29th         +5         +90 ft.                 
  30th         +6         +100ft.                 Bonus feat
  ------------ ---------- ----------------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Monk

## Epic Paladin

**Hit Die:** d10

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier

***Lay on Hands* (Su):**Each day a paladin can cure a total number of
hit points equal to his or her Charisma bonus (if any) times his or her
class level, as normal

**Smite Evil (Su):** The epic paladin adds his or her class level to
damage with any smite evil attack, as normal. He or she can smite one
additional time per day for every five levels higher than 20^th^.

**Turn Undead:** The paladin turns undead as a cleric of two levels
lower, as normal.

**Spells:** The paladin's caster level is equal to one-half his or her
class level, as normal. The paladin's number of spells per day does not
increase after 20th level.

**Special Mount:** The epic paladin's special mount continues to
increase in power. Every five levels after 20th the special mount gains
+2 bonus Hit Dice, its natural armor increases by +2, its Strength
adjustment increases by +1, and its Intelligence increases by +1. The
mount's spell resistance equals the paladin's class level + 5.

***Remove Disease* (Sp):** The epic paladin can use *remove disease* one
additional time per week for every three levels higher than 18th.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic paladin gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic paladin feats) every three levels higher than 20th.

*Epic Paladin Bonus Feat List:* Armor Skin, Devastating Critical, Epic
Leadership, Epic Prowess, Epic Reputation, Epic Toughness, Epic Weapon
Focus, Great Smiting, Holy Strike, Improved Aura of Courage, Improved
Combat Casting, Improved Spell Capacity, Legendary Commander, Legendary
Rider, Overwhelming Critical, Perfect Health, Permanent Emanation,
Planar Turning, Positive Energy Aura, Spectral Strike, Spontaneous
Spell, Widen Aura of Courage.

  --------------- -------------------------
  Paladin Level   Special
  21st            *Remove disease* 6/week
  22nd            ---
  23rd            Bonus feat
  24th            *Remove disease* 7/week
  25th            Smite evil 6/day
  26th            Bonus feat
  27th            *Remove disease* 8/week
  28th            ---
  29th            Bonus feat
  30th            *Remove disease* 9/week
  --------------- -------------------------

  : Table: The Epic Paladin

## Epic Ranger

**Hit Die:** d8

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 6 + Int modifier

**Spells:** The ranger's caster level is equal to one-half his or her
class level, as normal. The ranger's number of spells per day does not
increase after 20th level.

**Favored Enemy (Ex):** The epic ranger gains one additional favored
enemy, and his or her bonuses against one category of favored enemies
goes up by +2, every five levels higher than 20th.

**Animal companion:** The epic ranger's animal companion continues to
increase in power. The ranger's effective druid level is half his or her
ranger level.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic ranger gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic ranger feats) every three levels after 20th.

*Epic Ranger Bonus Feat List:* Bane of Enemies, Blinding Speed, Combat
Archery, Death of Enemies, Distant Shot, Epic Endurance, Epic Prowess,
Epic Speed, Epic Toughness, Epic Weapon Focus, Fast Healing, Improved
Combat Casting, Improved Favored Enemy, Improved Manyshot, Improved
Spell Capacity, Legendary Climber, Legendary Rider, Legendary Tracker,
Perfect Health, Perfect Two-Weapon Fighting, Permanent Emanation,
Spontaneous Spell, Storm of Throws, Swarm of Arrows, Two-Weapon Rend,
Uncanny Accuracy.

  -------------- -------------------
  Ranger Level   Special
  21st           ---
  22nd           ---
  23rd           Bonus feat
  24th           ---
  25th           6th favored enemy
  26th           Bonus feat
  27th           ---
  28th           ---
  29th           Bonus feat
  30th           7th favored enemy
  -------------- -------------------

  : Table: The Epic Ranger

## Epic Rogue

**Hit Die:** d6.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 8 + Int modifier.

**Sneak Attack:** The epic rogue's sneak attack damage increases by +1d6
at every odd-numbered level.

**Special Abilities:** The rogue does not gain additional rogue special
abilities after 19th level, but can choose one of the rogue class
special abilities(crippling strike, defensive roll, improved evasion,
opportunist, skill mastery, or slippery mind) instead of a bonus feat.

**Trap Sense (Ex):** The epic rogue's bonus increases by +1 every three
levels higher than 18th.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic rogue gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic rogue feats) every four levels after 20th.

*Epic Rogue Bonus Feat List:* Blinding Speed, Combat Archery, Dexterous
Fortitude, Dexterous Will, Epic Dodge, Epic Reputation, Epic Skill
Focus, Epic Speed, Improved Combat Reflexes, Improved Sneak Attack,
Legendary Climber, Lingering Damage, Self-Concealment, Sneak Attack of
Opportunity, Spellcasting Harrier, Superior Initiative, Trap Sense,
Uncanny Accuracy. The rogue may choose a special rogue abilityinstead of
a bonus feat.

  ------------- ------------------------------------
  Rogue Level   Special
  21st          Sneak attack +11d6 , trap sense +7
  22nd          ---
  23rd          Sneak attack +12d6
  24th          Trap sense +8, bonus feat
  25th          Sneak attack +13d6
  26th          ---
  27th          Sneak attack +14d6, trap sense +9
  28th          Bonus feat
  29th          Sneak attack +15d6
  30th          Trap sense +10
  ------------- ------------------------------------

  : Table: The Epic Rogue

## Epic Sorcerer

**Hit Die:** d4.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

**Spells:** The sorcerer's caster level is equal to his or her class
level. The sorcerer's number of spells per day does not increase after
20th level. The sorcerer does not learn additional spells unless he or
she selects the Spell Knowledge feat.

**Familiar:** The sorcerer's familiar continues to increase in power.
Every two levels beyond 20th the familiar's natural armor and
Intelligence each increase by +1. The familiar's spell resistance is
equal to the master's class level + 5. At 21^st^ level and again every
ten levels higher than 21^st^, the familiar gains the benefit of the
Familiar Spell epic feat for a spell of its master's choice.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic sorcerer gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic sorcerer bonus feats) every three levels after 20th.

*Epic Sorcerer Bonus Feat List:* Augmented Alchemy, Automatic Quicken
Spell, Automatic Silent Spell, Automatic Still Spell, Energy Resistance,
Enhance Spell, Epic Spell Focus, Epic Spell Penetration, Epic
Spellcasting, Familiar Spell, Ignore Material Components, Improved
Combat Casting, Improved Heighten Spell, Improved Metamagic, Improved
Spell Capacity, Intensify Spell, Master Staff, Master Wand, Multispell,
Permanent Emanation, Spell Knowledge, Spell Stowaway, Spell Opportunity.

  ---------------- ------------
  Sorcerer Level   Special
  21st             ---
  22nd             ---
  23rd             Bonus feat
  24th             ---
  25th             ---
  26th             Bonus feat
  27th             ---
  28th             ---
  29th             Bonus feat
  30th             ---
  ---------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Sorcerer

## Epic Wizard

**Hit Die:** d4.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

**Spells:** The wizard's caster level is equal to her class level. The
wizard's number of spells per day does not increase after 20th level.
Each time the wizard achieves a new level, he or she learns two new
spells of any spell levels that he or she can cast (according to his or
her new level).

**Familiar:** The wizards's familiar continues to increase in power.
Every two levels beyond 20th the familiar's natural armor and
Intelligence each increase by +1. The familiar's spell resistance is
equal to the master's class level + 5. At 21^st^ level and again every
ten levels higher than 21^st^, the familiar gains the benefit of the
Familiar Spell epic feat for a spell of its master's choice.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic wizard gains a bonus feat (selected from the
list of epic wizard feats) every three levels after 20th.

*Epic Wizard Bonus Feat List:* Augmented Alchemy, Automatic Quicken
Spell, Automatic Silent Spell, Automatic Still Spell, Combat Casting,
Craft Epic Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Epic Rod, Craft Epic Staff, Craft
Epic Wondrous Item, Efficient Item Creation, Enhance Spell, Epic Spell
Focus, Epic Spell Penetration, Epic Spellcasting, Familiar Spell, Forge
Epic Ring, Ignore Material Components, Improved Combat Casting, Improved
Heighten Spell, Improved Metamagic, Improved Spell Capacity, Intensify
Spell, Multispell, Permanent Emanation, Scribe Epic Scroll, Spell Focus,
Spell Knowledge, Spell Mastery, Spell Penetration Spell Stowaway, Spell
Opportunity, Spontaneous Spell, Tenacious Magic. In addition to the
feats on this list, the wizard may select any item creation feat or
metamagic feat not listed here.

  -------------- ------------
  Wizard Level   Special
  21st           ---
  22nd           ---
  23rd           Bonus feat
  24th           ---
  25th           ---
  26th           Bonus feat
  27th           ---
  28th           ---
  29th           Bonus feat
  30th           ---
  -------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Wizard

### Familiars at Epic Level

Special abilities granted to a familiar continue to grow as the level of
its master increases beyond 20th, as shown on Table: Epic Familiar
Special Abilities. Even though the table shows advancement only to 42nd
level, that is not the limit. The patterns in the table continue
infinitely. Familiar special abilities gained at less than 20th level
also continue to improve.

*Familiar Spell:* The familiar gains the benefit of the Familiar Spell
epic feat for the spell its master chooses.

  -------------------- --------------- ----- ----------------
  Master Class Level   Natural Armor   Int   Special
  21st--22nd           +11             16    Familiar Spell
  23rd--24th           +12             17    
  25th--26th           +13             18    
  27th--28th           +14             19    
  29th--30th           +15             20    
  31st--32nd           +16             21    Familiar Spell
  33rd--34th           +17             22    
  35th--36th           +18             23    
  37th--38th           +19             24    
  39th--40th           +20             25    
  41st--42nd           +21             26    Familiar Spell
  -------------------- --------------- ----- ----------------

  : Table: Epic Familiar Special Abilities

## Epic Psionic Class Progressions

Epic level psionic characters follow the same epic progression as
non-psionics epic characters, except as noted below.

-   For manifesters, manifester level continues to increase after 20th
    level. However, a manifester's power points and powers known at each
    level do not increase automatically after 20th level.
-   The powers of psicrystals that are based on the creator's level
    continue to increase as their owner gains levels.
-   Bonus feats for epic psionic classes can be chosen from among any
    epic feats for which the character meets the prerequisites or any
    psionic, metapsionic, or psionic item creation feat, as normal.

### No Epic Bonus Power Progression

Epic psionic characters do not gain additional bonus power points above
20th. They may still gain more power points as their key ability score
increases.

Psionic characters can take the Improved Manifestation feat, which
grants them additional power points each time they take the feat. Epic
manifesters can also take Epic Expanded Knowledge or Power Knowledge,
which give them access to additional powers, and Epic Psionic Focus,
which allows manifesters to use more than one metapsionic power each
time they expend their psionic focus.

## Epic Psion

**Hit Die:** d4.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

**Powers:** The psion's manifester level is equal to his class level.
The psion's base power points do not increase after 20th level. Each
time the psion attains a new level, he learns two new powers of any
level or levels that he can manifest.

**Psicrystal:** The epic psion's psicrystal, if he has one, continues to
increase in power. At every odd-numbered level higher than 20th (21st,
23rd, and so on) the psicrystal's natural armor bonus and Intelligence
each increase by 1. The psicrystal's power resistance is equal to the
master's level + 5. At 21st level and again every ten levels higher than
21st, the psicrystal gains the benefit of the Psicrystal Power epic feat
for a power of its master's choice.

**Bonus Feats:** The epic psion gains a bonus feat every three levels
higher than 20th (23rd, 26th, and so on).

  ------------- ------------
  Psion Level   Special
  21st          ---
  22nd          ---
  23rd          Bonus feat
  24th          ---
  25th          ---
  26th          Bonus feat
  27th          ---
  28th          ---
  29th          Bonus feat
  30th          ---
  ------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Psion

### Psicrystals at Epic Level

Special abilities granted to a psycrystal continue to grow as the level
of its master increases beyond 20th, as shown on Table: Epic Psicrystal
Special Abilities. Even though the table shows advancement only to 42nd
level, that is not the limit. The patterns in the table continue
infinitely. Psicrystal special abilities gained at less than 20th level
also continue to improve.

*Psicrystal Power:* The psicrystal gains the benefit of the Psicrystal
Power epic feat for the power its master chooses.

  ------------- -------------------- ---------- ------------------
  Owner Level   Natural Armor Adj.   Int Adj.   Special
  21st--22nd    +10                  +10        Psicrystal Power
  23rd--24th    +11                  +11        
  25th--26th    +12                  +12        
  27th--28th    +13                  +13        
  29th--30th    +14                  +14        
  31st--32nd    +15                  +15        Psicrystal Power
  33rd--34th    +16                  +16        
  35th--36th    +17                  +17        
  37th--38th    +18                  +18        
  39th--40th    +19                  +19        
  41st--42nd    +20                  +20        Psicrystal Power
  ------------- -------------------- ---------- ------------------

  : Table: Epic Psicrystal Special Abilities

## Epic Psychic Warrior

**Hit Die:** d8.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 2 + Int modifier.

**Powers:** The psychic warrior's manifester level is equal to her class
level. The psychic warrior's base power points do not increase after
20th level. The epic psychic warrior gains one new power of any level
that she can manifest at every even-numbered level she attains higher
than 20th (22nd, 24th, 26th, and so on).

**Bonus Feats:** The epic psychic warrior gains a bonus feat (selected
from the list of epic psychic warrior bonus feats) at 21st level and
every three levels thereafter.

  ----------------------- ------------
  Psychic Warrior Level   Special
  21st                    Bonus feat
  22nd                    ---
  23rd                    ---
  24th                    Bonus feat
  25th                    ---
  26th                    ---
  27th                    Bonus feat
  28th                    ---
  29th                    ---
  30th                    Bonus feat
  ----------------------- ------------

  : Table: The Epic Psychic Warrior

## Epic Soulknife

**Hit Die:** d10.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

**Mind Blade:** At 25th level and every five levels thereafter, the
soulknife gains an additional +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and
damage rolls (+6 at 25th, +7 at 30th, and so on).

**Mind Blade Enhancement:** The epic soulknife's mind blade gains
additional powers as the soulknife gains epic levels. At 22nd level and
every four levels thereafter, the soulknife can improve the value of the
weapon special abilities on his mind blade by 1 (+5 equivalent bonus at
22nd, +6 at 26th, and so on). As noted in the soulknife class
description, reassigning qualities still takes 8 hours of concentration.

**Psychic Strike:** The epic soulknife's psychic strike progression
continues past 20th level, continuing to grant an additional die (d8) of
damage every four levels higher than 19th (+6d8 at 23rd, +7d8 at 27th,
and so on).

**Bonus Feats:** The epic soulknife gains a bonus psionic feat every
three levels higher than 20th (23rd, 26th, and so on).

  ----------------- ---------------------------------------
  Soulknife Level   Special
  21st              ---
  22nd              Mind blade enhancement +5
  23rd              Bonus feat
  24th              ---
  25th              +6 mind blade
  26th              Mind blade enhancement +5, bonus feat
  27th              ---
  28th              ---
  29th              Bonus feat
  30th              +7 mind blade
  ----------------- ---------------------------------------

  : Table: The Epic Soulknife

## Epic Wilder

**Hit Die:** d6.

**Skill Points at Each Additional Level:** 4 + Int modifier.

**Powers:** The epic wilder's manifester level is equal to her class
level. The wilder's power points and powers known do not increase after
20th level (except through the use of epic feats).

**Wild Surge:** The epic wilder's wild surge continues to increase after
20th level. At 23rd level and every four levels higher than 23rd, the
wild surge continues to gain an additional +1 boost to manifester level
when used (+7 at 23rd, +8 at 27th, and so on).

**Surging Euphoria:** The wilder's surging euphoria progression
continues past 20th level. At 28th level and every eight levels higher
than 28th, the morale bonus on her attack rolls, damage rolls, and
saving throws increases by 1 (+4 at 28th, +5 at 36th, and so on).

**Volatile Mind:** The epic wilder's volatile mind ability continues to
increase. At 21st level and every four levels higher than 21st, the
penalty assessed against telepathy powers manifested on the wilder is
increased by 1 power point (5 points at 21st, 6 points at 25th, and so
on).

  -------------- --------------------------------
  Wilder Level   Special
  21st           Volatile mind (5 power points)
  22nd           ---
  23rd           Wild surge +7
  24th           ---
  25th           Volatile mind (6 power points)
  26th           ---
  27th           Wild surge +8
  28th           Surging euphoria +4
  29th           Volatile mind (7 power points)
  30th           ---
  -------------- --------------------------------

  : Table: The Epic Wilder
